[Page 1]
Month Year 

March 2025  

General Guidance on the Consumer 
Protection Code  
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 2]
 

2 
 

Table of Contents 

Section - 1 Introduction ................................................................ 4  

1.1.  
Overview ............................................................................................ 4  

1.2.  
Scope and Application .................................................................... 6  

1.3.  
Definitions and Terminology ........................................................ 8  

1.4.  
Assessing Compliance ................................................................. 10  

1.5.  
Data Protection Obligations ..................................................... 11  

Section - 2 Guidance on Standards for Business Regulations 
12  

2.2.  
Informing Effectively ................................................................... 12  

2.3.  
Unregulated Activities ................................................................ 23  

2.4.  
Financial Abuse ............................................................................. 26  

Section - 3 Guidance on the Consumer Protection Regulations 28  

3.2.  
Knowing the Consumer and Suitability .................................. 28  

3.3.  
Sustainability Preferences ......................................................... 28  

3.4.  
Conflicts of Interest and Information about Remuneration30  

3.5.  
Digitalisation .................................................................................. 31  

3.6.  
Regulatory Disclosure Statements .......................................... 39  

3.7.  
Advertising ..................................................................................... 40  

3.8.  
Errors Resolution .......................................................................... 45  

3.9.  
Complaints Resolution ................................................................ 46  

3.10.  
Specific Requirements for Credit Institutions .................. 47  

3.11.  
Specific Guidance for the Insurance Sector ...................... 50  

 

 
 

[Page 3]
 

3 
 

Table of examples 
Box 1: Filtering .........................................................................................................................................................35  
Box 2: Durable mediums ......................................................................................................................................36  
Box 3: Provision of financial services through digital platforms - supporting good online 
decision making ........................................................................................................................................................37  
Box 5: Price specific advertising and qualifying criteria .........................................................................45  
Box 6: Potential pre renewal notification wording ...................................................................................51  
 
Table of case studies 
Case Study 1 – Marketing and Advertising of Investment Products .................................................14  
Case Study 2 - How to inform effectively –appropriate delivery channel and timing ................17  
Case Study 3 - informing effectively to increase engagement and impact .....................................19  
Case Study 4 - informing effectively to drive action by customers –Home Insurance Market
 .........................................................................................................................................................................................22  
 
 

[Page 4]
 

4 
 

Section - 1   Introduction  

1.1.   Overview  

1.1.1  
The Consumer Protection Code (the Code) is made up of a number of components 
including Standards for Business Regulations, Consumer Protection Regulations 
(comprising cross-sectoral and sector specific requirements) and guidance, as 
illustrated in the infographic below.  

 

Figure 1 Consumer Protection Code Components Source: Central Bank of Ireland  

1.1.2  
The Standards for Business and cross-sectoral and sector specific requirements 
are set out in two Central Bank Regulations:  

•   Central Bank Reform Act 2010 (Section 17A) (Standards For Business) 
Regulations 2025 (S.I. No. 80 of 2025) (‘the Standards For Business 
Regulations’)  

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 5]
 

5 
 

•   Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 (Section 48) (Consumer 
Protection) Regulations 2025 (S.I. No. 81 of 2025) (‘the Consumer Protection 
Regulations’).  

1.1.3  
The Standards for Business Regulations set out governance, resource and risk 
management requirements for firms. They also set out conduct standards for firms. 
These are complemented by Supporting Standards for Business which provide 
further detail on firms’ obligations. The Standards for Business and Supporting 
Standards for Business addressing securing customers' interests and financial 
abuse, will only apply to firms when doing business with individuals and small 
businesses. All other Standards for Business and Supporting Standards for 
Business will apply to the regulated business of firms conducted with all 
customers. 

1.1.4  
The Consumer Protection Regulations set out cross-sectoral requirements 
applying across all sectors, and other sector specific requirements applying to the 
provision of Consumer Banking, Credit and Arrears, Insurance and Investments. 
These requirements apply to the regulated business of firms conducted with 
customers who meet the definition of ‘consumer’ i.e. individuals and small 
businesses. These Regulations also consolidate a number of existing conduct 
regulations and codes, issued by the Central Bank, into one set of regulations. 

1.1.5  
The Code is further complemented by this Guidance, Guidance on Protecting 
Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances and Guidance on Securing Customers’ 
Interests. 1  

1.1.6  
The purpose of this General Guidance (the Guidance) is to support firms to 
effectively implement their consumer protection obligations and can be utilised by 
firms to build on their understanding on how to implement the requirements set 
out in the Standards for Business Regulations and the Consumer Protection 
Regulations.  

1.1.7  
This Guidance consolidates the following guidance:  

•   Consumer Protection Code Guidance 2012 2 ; and 

                                                                 
1  Central Bank Reform Act 2010 (Section 17A) (Standards For Business) Regulations 2025 (S.I. No. 80 of 2025); 
Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 (Section 48) (Consumer Protection) Regulations 2025 
(S.I. No. 81 of 2025).  
2  Central Bank of Ireland (2012 updated 2021) Consumer Protection Code 2012 Guidance. Available at: 
https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/regulation/industry-market-sectors/brokers-retail-
intermediaries/guidance/updated-2012-code-guidance-document.pdf?sfvrsn=28d0d11d_8    

[Page 6]
 

6 
 

•   Consumer Protection Code 2012 Advertising Guidance. 3  

1.1.8  
This Guidance also incorporates content as relevant from a number of ‘Dear CEO’ 
letters issued by the Central Bank.  

1.1.9  
It is also worth noting that there is separate information for consumers on 
mortgages and financial difficulty and Alternative Repayment Arrangements 
(ARAs). 4   

1.1.10  
The shorthand reference of ‘the Code’ is used within this document to mean the 
two sets out regulations set out in 1.1.2 and the supporting Guidance.  

1.1.11  
This Guidance does not replace or substitute other applicable rules, guidance or 
law.  

1.2.   Scope and Application  

1.2.1  
Some requirements of the Code, such as the Standards for Business Regulations, 
apply to all sectors and firms, reflecting the fundamental nature of these 
obligations. Other requirements of the Code apply only to specific sectors or to 
specific products or delivery channels. For example, a firm that does not provide 
credit or debt management services is not subject to the requirements of the Code, 
which specifically deal with the provision of these services. Other requirements 
are only applicable to firms that provide mortgages, while High Cost Credit 
Providers are also subject to a specific set of requirements.  

1.2.2  
Regulation 2 of the Standards for Business Regulations   sets out the scope and 
application of the Standards for Business. The Standards for Business Regulations 
apply to regulated entities operating in the State (including financial services 
providers authorised, registered or licensed by the Central Bank and financial 
services providers authorised, registered or licensed in another EU or EEA 
Member State) in the conduct of their affairs.  

1.2.3  
The Standards for Business Regulations do not apply to: 

•   Services provided by regulated entities to persons outside the State; 

•   MiFID services (other than services or activities of a person excluded from 
the scope of the European Union (Markets in Financial Instruments) 

                                                                 
3  Central Bank of Ireland (2013) Guidance on the Advertising Requirements of the Consumer Protection Code 
2012. Available at:   https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/regulation/consumer-protection/other-
codes-of-conduct/7-gns-4-2-7-guidance-on-the-advertising.pdf?sfvrsn=6    
4  Central Bank of Ireland (2024) Mortgages and financial difficulty   [online]. Available at: 
https://www.centralbank.ie/consumer-hub/mortgages-and-financial-difficulty.   

[Page 7]
 

7 
 

Regulations 2017 by virtue of Regulation 4(3) of those Regulations). 5  The 
Central Bank’s guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests, however, sets 
out that we expect firms providing MiFID services to consider and apply 
the guidance in the context of fulfilling their obligation to “act honestly, 
fairly and professionally in accordance with the best interests of [their] 
clients”, in accordance with Regulation 31 of the MiFID Regulations; 

•   Credit unions, other than when acting as insurance intermediaries; 

•   The activities of a crowdfunding service provider; or 

•   Reinsurance business. 

1.2.4  
Part 1 of the Standards for Business Regulations   and   Part 1 of the Consumer 
Protection Regulations  sets out the scope and application of these regulations. The 
Consumer Protection Regulations apply to the regulated activities of regulated 
entities operating in the State, including financial services providers authorised, 
registered or licensed by the Central Bank and financial services providers 
authorised, registered or licensed in another EU or EEA Member State when 
providing services in this State on a branch or cross-border basis.   

1.2.5  
The types of firms that the Consumer Protection Regulations apply to include:  

•   Credit Institutions;  

•   Insurance Undertakings;  

•   Investment Business Firms, authorised under the Investment 
Intermediaries Act 1995;  

•   Investment Intermediaries, authorised under the Investment 
Intermediaries Act 1995;  

•   Insurance Intermediaries; 

•   Mortgage Intermediaries;  

•   Payment Institutions;  

•   Electronic Money Institutions;  

•   Credit Unions, when acting as insurance intermediaries;  

                                                                 
5  Additionally the guidance, direction and learning for firms set out in the Guidance on Protecting Consumers in 
Vulnerable Circumstances should also be considered by firms providing MiFID services, where it explains how 
firms can act in the best interests of consumers in vulnerable circumstances. It should be noted, however, that 
the Central Bank does not expect firms providing MiFID services to comply with Trusted Contact Persons 
requirements and training requirements. 

[Page 8]
 

8 
 

•   Regulated entities providing retail credit;  

•   Home Reversion Firms;  

•   Debt Management Firms;  

•   Credit Servicing Firms; 

•   Crowdfunding Service Providers; 

•   Credit purchasers; and 

•   Firms providing MiCAR services. 

1.2.6  
The  Consumer Protection Regulations do not apply to: 

•   Services provided by regulated entities to persons outside the State;  

•   MiFID services (other than services or activities of a person excluded from 
the scope of the European Union (Markets in Financial Instruments) 
Regulations 2017 by virtue of Regulation 4(3) of those Regulations) 6 ;  

•   Reinsurance business; and 

•   Credit unions, other than when acting as insurance intermediaries. 

1.3.   Definitions and Terminology 

1.3.1  
The Code uses the terms ‘consumer’ and ‘customer’ throughout. The term 
‘customer’ includes any person to whom a regulated entity is providing, or has 
provided, a financial service, or whose custom the regulated entity might be 
soliciting, via marketing, advertising or other forms of offering, and is therefore a 
potential customer of the regulated entity.   

1.3.2  
In general, firms only deal with consumers with whom they have a contract but 
firms will not always be dealing with someone who is already an actual customer. 
For example:  

•   when approving or communicating a financial promotion,  

•   when answering a question from a prospective customer, or  

                                                                 
6  The Central Bank’s Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests, however, sets out that we expect firms 
providing MiFID services to consider and apply the guidance in the context of fulfilling their obligation to “act 
honestly, fairly and professionally in accordance with the best interests of [their] clients” in accordance with 
Regulation 31 of the MiFID Regulations. Additionally the guidance, direction, and learning for firms set out in 
the Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances should also be considered by firms 
providing MiFID services, where it explains how firms can act in the best interests of consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances. It should be noted, however, that the Central Bank does not expect firms providing MiFID 
services to comply with Trusted Contact Persons requirements and training requirements. 

[Page 9]
 

9 
 

•   where a prospective customer applies for a product or service, even if 
they do not proceed to enter into a contract with the firm.  

The definition of ‘customer’ includes existing customers, prospective customers 
and former customers (i.e. those who are not current customers). 

1.3.3  
In some cases, the use of the term ‘customer’ (or ‘consumer’) will only refer to 
current customers, and it will not be appropriate (or relevant) to apply the 
requirement in respect of customers that are not current customers. In other cases 
the context of the requirement will demand that the term ‘customer’ (or 
‘consumer’) will also include, where appropriate, potential customers and/or 
former customers (that are not current customers). For example, assessments of 
suitability of alternative arrangements for customers of a branch of a credit 
institution only applies in respect of existing customers.  

1.3.4  
‘Consumer’ is a subset of all customers and is defined in the Code as being limited 
to a specific class of customer that is: 

a)   a natural person, 

b)   a group of natural persons, including a partnership, club, charity, trust or 
other unincorporated body, or 

c)   an incorporated body, that is not – 

i.  
an incorporated body that had an annual turnover in excess of €5 
million in the previous financial year, or 

ii.  
an incorporated body that is a member of a group of companies having a 
combined turnover greater than €5 million in the previous financial 
year. 

1.3.5  
The Standards for Business Regulations apply, for the most part, in respect of 
business done with all customers as defined. However, the Standards for Business 
and Supporting Standards for Business dealing with securing customers’ interests 
and countering the risks to customers of financial abuse only apply in respect of 
those customers who are ‘consumers’. 

1.3.6  
The Consumer Protection Regulations generally apply only in respect of business 
done by regulated entities with customers who are consumers. In some cases, the 
obligations of the Consumer Protection Regulations are further limited to 
customers who are personal consumers i.e. natural persons acting outside their 
business, trade or profession. 

1.3.7  
The term ‘affected consumer’ is referred to in a number of requirements within the 
regulations. Where it appears it is generally in relation to notifying ‘affected 

[Page 10]
 

10 
 

consumers’ of an issue that affects them and/or identifying ‘affected consumers’. 
The term has not been defined in the Consumer Protection Regulations, as the 
ordinary meaning of the word applies. As such, the Central Bank does not 
necessarily expect that all customers of a firm must be notified of every change or 
development, but that where a change (e.g. to the terms of business, or to certain 
fees or charges) will affect certain consumers, then those consumers should be 
notified in line with the relevant requirement. It is for a firm to determine in the 
circumstances which of their consumers are affected.  

1.3.8  
A number of requirements require consideration of the term ‘average consumer’. 
This appears several times in the regulations and, again, the term is not defined 
within the Code. This is because the meaning of ‘average consumer’ may differ 
from one firm to another, across a product or service line offered by that firm, or 
across different financial services sectors. One product or service type offered by a 
firm may be more likely to attract sophisticated investors, with higher levels of 
financial literacy. Other more basic financial products or services might be 
targeted at all customers (e.g. bank accounts) in which case the average customer 
may have more limited knowledge and lower levels of financial literacy. The 
concept of ‘average consumer’ is particularly relevant in terms of firms considering 
whether their communications are likely to be understood by the customers 
intended to receive the communication. 

1.3.9  
References to variable interest rates throughout the Consumer Protection 
Regulations should be interpreted as including tracker interest rates. 

1.4.   Assessing Compliance  

1.4.1  
This Guidance, Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests, Protecting Consumers 
in Vulnerable Circumstances and the Central Bank’s Guide to Consumer 
Protection Risk Assessment (CPRA Guidance) 7 , which sets out the Central Bank’s 
expectations of firms’ consumer risk management frameworks, are 
complementary documents, which should be read together. They have been 
developed to support firms in implementing their Code requirements and risk 
management frameworks. The CPRA Guidance describes the Central Bank’s 
expectations of regulated financial services firms in implementing or enhancing 
their frameworks for managing risks to consumers, which should support firms in 
assessing the effectiveness of their frameworks. While, as noted in the CPRA 
Guidance, firm-specific CPRAs will form a key part of our supervisory framework 
for credit institutions, non-bank lenders, insurance undertakings, investment firms, 

                                                                 
7  Central Bank of Ireland (2017)  CPRA guide to Consumer Protection   Risk Assessment . Available at: 
https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/regulation/consumer-protection/170328-cpra-guide-28-
march-2017.pdf    

[Page 11]
 

11 
 

large retail intermediaries, payment institutions and e-money institutions, it 
reflects questions that all firms can ask themselves when assessing compliance 
with consumer protection obligations. 

1.4.2  
This Guidance includes a number of case studies and examples to support firms in 
implementing certain Code requirements. As a set of illustrative, non-exhaustive 
case studies and examples, we do not intend to cover every scenario or situation 
that may arise for a sector or firm. While the examples may refer to a specific 
sector or product, the principles and learnings highlighted in these examples are 
potentially relevant for all sectors and firms.  

1.4.3  
We expect all firms to take the principles and learnings highlighted in each of the 
examples (set out in the numbered boxes) and consider how they apply for their 
specific sector, business model or product or service offering. Firms should 
consider how the case studies and examples as set out may be relevant for their 
sector and for the range of products or services that a firm provides.  

1.5.   Data Protection Obligations 

1.5.1  
The requirements set out in the Code operate without prejudice to those 
obligations that firms have under the General Data Protection Regulation 8  or Irish 
data protection laws. Nothing in the Code should be interpreted as removing a 
firm’s obligations in relation to its approach to the collection, processing, and 
retention of personal data, and to ensure that its approach is consistent with those 
laws. 
 

                                                                 
8  European Commission (n.d.)  Legal Framework of EU data protection  [online] .  Available at: 
https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/legal-framework-eu-data-protection_en.   

[Page 12]
 

12 
 

Section - 2   Guidance on Standards for Business Regulations 

2.1.1  
As noted in section 1.2, the Standards for Business Regulations set out governance, 
resource and risk management requirements for firms. They also set out conduct 
standards for firms. These are complemented by Supporting Standards for 
Business which provide further detail on firms’ obligations. Guidance on Securing 
Customers’ Interests 9  articulates the Central Bank’s expectations of firms in 
meeting their obligation under the Standards for Business to secure customers’ 
interests. This section sets out guidance for firms in implementing a number of the 
Standards for Business Regulations. 

2.2.   Informing Effectively  

Standards for Business Regulations -   Regulation 4(1)(e)   &  Regulation 9  

2.2.1  
Informing consumers effectively enables them to make informed decisions to meet 
their financial needs. It allows them to compare products and services, shop 
around for better value, and to have trust and confidence in the financial services 
sector.  

2.2.2  
The importance of informing effectively is reflected in this Regulation, which 
requires that firms ensure that all information provided to customers is presented 
in a way that effectively informs the customer. This Standard for Business is 
supplemented by a Supporting Standard for Business on Informing Effectively.  

2.2.3  
Firms are required to inform their customers effectively, including by: 

•   ensuring that information is provided to a customer in such a way that the 
material features of the product or service in question can reasonably be 
understood by the customer; 

•   ensuring that all information provided to a customer is clear, accurate, up 
to date, and written in plain and accessible language, avoiding the 
unnecessary use of technical terms; and 

•   providing information to customers on a timely basis, and bringing key 
information to the attention of customers.  

2.2.4  
In seeking to ensure they inform their customers effectively, firms should take 
seven core considerations into account when drafting and delivering information 
to customers.  

Consideration 1 - Customer profile  

                                                                 
9  Central Bank of Ireland (2025)  Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests.   

[Page 13]
 

13 
 

2.2.5  
Firms must consider the profile of the target audience for any information they are 
providing. Customers’ needs, levels of financial literacy, knowledge and experience 
vary. Firms will need to carefully consider all of these variables and decide how to 
best design and deliver information to these customers (which includes potential 
customers). This can help to address the asymmetry in knowledge and information 
between firms and customers. Considerations should include: 

•   Who is the firm communicating with – does the target market have specific 
needs or characteristics such as a lower level of digital or financial literacy? 

•   Are there cohorts of consumers in vulnerable circumstances, who may 
have specific information needs? For example, certain cohorts of 
consumers may have a language other than English as a first language, so 
consideration could be given to how to ensure that all communications and 
information about products and services are understandable for 
consumers in the target market and customer base.  

•   Do some customers have accessibility needs and can information be 
presented in ways that address these needs – for example, firms should 
consider if people using assistive technologies such as voice commands can 
navigate information.   

•   Consideration could be given to the use of Braille display, hearing induction 
loops, relay text audio explanations and access to Irish Sign Language (ISL) 
interpreters.   

Consideration 2 – Content   
2.2.6  
Content should be drafted to meet the needs of customers and support their 
understanding taking into account their level of financial literacy and familiarity 
with financial concepts. Content should be focused on the information a customer 
needs to make an informed decision. The use of scenarios and illustrative examples 
can assist customers in understanding the features and characteristics of financial 
products. In some instances, an FAQ, glossary or jargon buster could help 
customers.  

[Page 14]
 

14 
 

Case Study 1 – Marketing and Advertising of Investment Products  

In October 2024, the Central Bank published research on the experience of retail 
investors regarding investment firms’ marketing and advertising materials. 10  One of 
the findings of the research found a discrepancy between the approach taken by 
firms in terms of language and content describing and marketing the overall 
benefits of a product and the risks associated with the product.   
 
Investors reported that products’ benefits are often explained in plain language and 
illustrated using graphs and visuals. However, when it comes to risks and warnings, 
the language tends to become much more technical, and text based. This 
inconsistency can potentially lead to less engagement with content relating to risks 
and warnings. 
 

“The language and tone of voice used on the site when describing the 
benefits is layman's language, which is good. However, the language and 
tone used in the risks requires some financial literacy as it uses terms specific 
to finance e.g. hedging, derivatives, liquidity risk and the tone becomes more 
corporate and serious here.”  (Mystery shopping exercise, consumer quote) 
 
The same effort should be taken to clearly communicate the risks of a product, as 
has been taken to outline the benefits and advantages of a product, and efforts 
should be made to provide information on risks of a product in simple terms to 
support investors’ understanding.    

 

2.2.7  
Firms should also consider referring customers to other available information and 
support tools including for example the information and tools provided by the 
Consumer and Competition Protection Commission (CCPC) 11  and the Money 
Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS). 12  

Consideration 3 - Language  
Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulation 9(b)  

                                                                 
10  Central Bank of Ireland (2024)  Consumer Research Bulletin Marketing and Advertising of Investment Products . 
Available at:   https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/publications/consumer-protection-
research/consumer-research-bulletin-marketing-and-advertising-investment-
products.pdf?sfvrsn=44b1661a_6    
11  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission  Money tools . Available at: 
https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money-tools/.   
12  Money Advice and Budgeting Service  Welcome to MABS, the Money Advice and Budgeting Service . Available at: 
https://www.mabs.ie/en/.   

[Page 15]
 

15 
 

2.2.8  
Firms must use plain language in their communications. They should consider using 
the ISO Plain Language Standards, NALA’s Writing and Design Tips, the NDA’s  
Toolkits, and the Customer Communications Toolkit for Services to the Public to 
assist them in meeting this requirement.  13  

Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 47  

2.2.9  
In its communications with customers, firms should avoid using unnecessary 
technical terms or jargon. When providing information to consumers, it is a 
requirement that where the use of technical terms cannot be avoided, firms must 
explain the meaning of technical terms in plain language where first used, or in a 
clearly referenced glossary. 

Consideration 4 - Display 
2.2.10  
How firms display information to customers can significantly influence how 
customers will interact with it and whether they are effectively informed. Poor 
presentation of information can distort customers’ ability to assess the benefits 
and risks of financial products and services. Firms should consider if key 
information could be highlighted with the use of display features such as layering 
and the use of spacing, bold font or colour. 

Consideration 5 - Delivery channel 
2.2.11  
In communications with customers, firms should consider and determine the most 
appropriate channel to communicate and deliver information to their customers. 
Firms should select the delivery channel most appropriate for the profile of their 
customers. Firms should consider the characteristics of the customers that their 
communications are aimed at and determine what is the most effective mechanism 
or channel that could be used to effectively inform their customers. For example, 
and without prejudice to any legal requirement to provide the information in 
writing, giving information in a video or an infographic could assist customers. 
These mechanisms could support conveying of key messages and support 
engagement and understanding.  

Consideration 6 - Timing  
2.2.12  
Well-timed communication from firms to their customers, including at appropriate 
points in the product lifecycle, will support customers in their ability to make 
informed decisions about a financial product or service. Providing information at 
the right time increases the likelihood that customers will actively engage with it. 

                                                                 
13  The International Organisation for Standardisation Plain Language Standards. Available at: 
https://www.iso.org/standards.html   , National Adult Literacy Agency Writing and Design Tips. Available at:. 
https://www.nala.ie/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Writing-and-design-tips.pdf  , National Disability Authority 
Toolkits. Available at:   https://nda.ie/publications-and-resources/toolkits , Customer Communications Toolkit 
for Services to the Public. Available at:   https://assets.gov.ie/27854/ba64cc4f27bf4fa1b535e4b6418f0e89.pdf    

[Page 16]
 

16 
 

There could be various points over a product or service lifecycle where it would be 
useful to receive information. For example overdraft alert mechanisms (through 
text messages or other delivery channels) when a customer is about to utilise a 
pre-arranged overdraft, due to a scheduled payment such as a direct debit or if the 
account has already gone into overdraft, for example, through a cash withdrawal. 
Such notifications can assist customers in staying aware of their overdraft 
utilisation and associated fees and charges.   

2.2.13  
There can be changes to a product or service over time. Features of a product may 
change in particular for longer-term contracts. In addition, customers’ 
circumstances and financial needs and objectives may also change over time and at 
particular stages of life or as a result of life events. Firms should communicate with 
customers at appropriate stages of the customer and product lifecycle. For 
example prior to an introductory offer period ending, so that customers have 
sufficient time to consider if a product continues to meet their needs and if it no 
longer does, that they have time to take appropriate actions.   

2.2.14  
Consumer research carried out by the Central Bank in relation to pensions and 
retirement income, highlighted that the level of a consumer’s engagement with 
their pension can be affected by the communications they receive from their 
scheme or provider. 14  Consumers’ understanding of and engagement with their 
retirement needs, and with their pension funding, needs to be improved, for 
example, through better and more relevant information for consumers on private 
pension products. The research noted that consumers reported that the most 
significant improvement that could be made in relation to communications about 
their pensions was for consumers to receive more frequent information.  

 

 

 

                                                                 
14    Central Bank of Ireland (2024) Consumer Research Report Pension and retirement income Key challenges 
for consumers. Available at:  https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/publications/consumer-
protection-research/pension-and-retirement-income-july-24 .pdf .  

 

[Page 17]
 

17 
 

Case Study 2 - How to inform effectively –appropriate delivery channel and 
timing 

A bank sends its credit card customers a text message up to three weeks in advance 
to notify them of a payment due. This clearly sets out the payment amount to be 
paid, the date the payment is due and informs the customer that the payment is to 
be made by direct debit on that specific date.  

 

Customers may find this notification useful as it specifies the key information in a 
short text message that is delivered at the appropriate time for the customer to 
take action. The message notifies the customer of the specific amount that will be 
taken from a (current) account on a specific date, so that the customer can ensure 
that they have sufficient funds in that account prior to the direct debit issuing.  

 
Consideration 7 – Testing and Review  
2.2.15  
Often the firms and those involved in the development of communication and 
content provided to customers will have a detailed understanding of the 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 18]
 

18 
 

information in the specific communications that they provide to customers. 
However, this does not guarantee that the customers who the communications are 
targeted at understand the communications. Testing and review can help to ensure 
that firms are informing their customers effectively. 

2.2.16  
The level of testing and review should be informed by the nature and complexity of 
the communication which is issuing to customers. Firms should consider testing 
the effectiveness of the information they give to customers at two points - both (1) 
before, and (2) after, the provision of the information. For example, 
communications or content for new product development or launches, marketing 
and other supporting material could be tested with focus groups to check whether 
the content is understandable and supports their ability to make informed 
decisions. Focus groups could include civil society groups, for example those 
representing people with disabilities. 

2.2.17  
Firms should also consider testing information after it has been provided. For 
example, firms could consider using mystery shopping or focus groups to gather 
feedback and assess the effectiveness of their communications with customers.  

2.2.18  
Information and communications should be reviewed on a regular basis to ensure 
it continues to inform customers effectively. Firms should also review compliance 
reports to identify any trends in complaints which may suggest weaknesses in 
information provision. 

[Page 19]
 

19 
 

Case Study 3 - informing effectively to increase engagement and impact 

The Central Bank conducted research in 2022 to test how targeted enhancements 
to existing disclosures on available lower cost mortgage products provided by a 
lender could prompt greater take-up by customers of advantageous mortgage 
refinancing opportunities. 15    
 
Enhancements designed to tackle a series of behavioural biases, which have been 
shown to deter optimal financial engagement; including, inattention, present bias 
and procrastination were tested.  
 
These enhancements included simplification of information, provision of 
personalised savings estimates (in various formats including the use of a gain frame 
and a loss frame), provision of key information in colour rather than black and white 
and use of prominent subject lines.  
 
The format set out below was found to be the most effective:  

                                                                 
15  Central Bank of Ireland (2022)  Targeted communications with mortgage borrowers can help to improve uptake of 
refinancing opportunities . Available at:  https://www.centralbank.ie/news-media/press-releases/targeted-
communications-with-mortgage-borrowers-can-help-to-improve-uptake-of-refinancing-opportunities-8-
december-2022.  

[Page 20]
 

20 
 

 

 

 
Mortgage Account Number: 1234567 

You may be able to save money on your mortgage 

Dear John,  

Your current mortgage interest rate is a standard variable rate of 4.5%. We want to make sure you are 
getting the best deal and we may have a lower interest rate for your mortgage. 

Current monthly 
repayment at 4.25%: 
€716  

•  
We have a range of interest rates that could save you 
money.  
 
•  
Our lowest rate is a fixed rate of 2.9%, which could 
result in an immediate monthly saving to you of about 
€126. Over the course of a full year, that’s 
approximately €1,512 in savings. 
 

•  
Below, we outline the full range of interest rate options 
currently available, along with the next steps to take if 
you wish to choose one of these alternative options.  

Potential monthly 
repayment at 2.9% fixed: 
€590  

Estimated difference in 
monthly repayments 
-€126  

Potential difference over 
the  year: 
-€1,512  

 
Explaining the tables below 

These tables show you the interest rates along with the Annual Percentage Rate of Charge (APRC). We 
explain APRC at the end of this letter. The rates may vary by Loan to Value (LTV) ratio. We also explain 
LTV at the end of this letter.   

Fixed interest rates 

Fixed 
interest 
rate options 

Loan to Value 

Up to 60% 

Loan to Value 

61-80% 

Loan to Value 

over 80% 

Difference in 

monthly 
repayments 

Difference over 

the year 

1-year 
2.9% (3.9% 

APRC) 

2.9% (4.2% 

APRC) 
2.9% (4.4% APRC)  
-€126 
-€1,512 

2-year 
2.9% (3.8% 

APRC) 

2.9% (4.0% 

APRC) 
2.9% (4.3% APRC)  
-€126 
-€1,512 

3-year 
3% (3.7% 

APRC) 

3% (3.9% 

APRC) 
3% (4.1% APRC) 
-€118 
-€1,416 

5-year 
3% (3.6% 

APRC) 

3% (3.7% 

APRC) 
3% (3.9% APRC) 
-€118 
-€1,416 

10-year 
3.3% (3.5% 

APRC) 

3.3% (3.6% 

APRC) 

 
-€95 
-€1,140 

10-year 
 
 
3.5% (3.8% APRC)  
-€80 
-€960 

 

 

[Page 21]
 

21 
 

This communication increased refinancing activity among mortgage holders by 76% 
when compared against the pre-existing standard notification.   

 
This research clearly evidences the impact that enhanced disclosure measures can 
have on the effectiveness of information presented to customers. In this case, the 
combination of a simply presented personalised savings estimate and displaying key 
information in colour rather than black and white was shown to significantly impact 
on customers’ refinancing behaviour .  

 
The research also evidenced the impact of the timing of the provision of information 
with the provision of a reminder 4-6 weeks after the original communication shown 
to help to address procrastination and forgetfulness and strengthen the impact of 
the initial notificication.   

 
The research demonstrates how small changes, carefully applied and pre-tested can 
have a significant impact on the effectiveness of information.   

 
Firms should continually focus on ways they can improve the effectivness of the 
information they provide to customers. This includes regulatory disclosures. For 
example, under EU requirements, 16  firms who sell Packaged Retail Insurance-based 
Investment Products (PRIIPs) must provide investors with a Key Information 
Document (KID). Firms are required to share the KID with consumers in advance of 
their final consent to purchase. The purpose of the KID is to provide investors with 
a simple, generic and concise document that provides key information on the 
investment product.   

 
Notwithstanding the prescriptive nature of the PRIIPs KID requirements, firms 
should still give consideration to how they can contribute to customer engagement 
with and understanding of the information provided in the KID. However, in 
practice we have seen examples of KIDs where it is clear that the firm has taken a 
‘tick box’ approach to the provision of information via a KID with limited attempts 
to support navigability and understanding through the use of plain language, layout, 
font size and use of headings and colour or bold.  

 
The findings and learnings from the research on mortgage refinancing have direct 
relevance for all firms as they consider how to most effectively present 
information to their customers. They can be applied across many types of 
information and disclosures  provided by firms to their customers. Firms should 
have a continued focus on what steps they can take to improve the effectiveness 
of the information they provide to their customers. 

                                                                 
16  Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 November 2014 on key 
information documents for packaged retail and insurance-based investment products (PRIIPs). 

[Page 22]
 

22 
 

Case Study 4 - informing effectively to drive action-taking by customers –Home 
Insurance Market  

The Central Bank carried out a review in 2022 that showed evidence of increasing 
levels of under-insurance in the home insurance market as a result of an increase in 
rebuild costs. 17  Under-insurance can cause significant consumer detriment, as if a 
property is underinsured it can result in customers not being fully covered for 
losses if they have to make a home insurance claim. The review found that not all 
firms were sufficiently highlighting key risks to consumers.  
 
A number of areas were identified where further action was needed by firms to 
make consumers aware of the risk and implications of under-insurance. The Central 
Bank outlined a range of steps that firms were required to undertake to 
communicate the risk of under-insurance to customers in a clear and 
understandable way by:  
  

•   Writing to all home insurance policyholders explaining under-insurance; 

•   Setting out the implications of being under-insured, the reasons why this is 

currently a heightened risk and how policyholders can better estimate the 

adequate insured value; 

•   Providing clear worked examples of the consequences of under-insurance in 

the event that a policyholder had to make a claim where their home was 

underinsured; and 

•   Treating the risk of under-insurance as ‘key information’ and disclosing it as 

such to customers. 

   
The impact of this communication was that customers were effectively informed 
about the risks and consequences of being under-insured and prompted to take 
appropriate actions to address this risk.   This example is set in a specific context and 
should over-insurance be identified, then we would expect firms to advise of the 
risk of over-insuring, whereby customers pay excess premiums based on cover that 
is not required.  
 
In this case study the Central Bank identified a gap in firms’ engagement with 
their customers on an important customer risk and instructed firms to engage 
effectively with their customers on this matter. We expect firms to proactively 
consider what information their customers need to support them in making 
informed decisions to protect their financial well-being. 

[Page 23]
 

23 
 

2.3.   Unregulated Activities  

2.3.1  
Customers need clarity on what is regulated and what is not regulated. Where 
regulated firms engage in regulated and unregulated activities, there is a 
heightened risk that customers may misunderstand their protections because of 
the firm’s regulated status. 

2.3.2  
Firms are required to clearly distinguish between the entity’s regulated activities 
and its unregulated activities for customers, by taking all appropriate steps to 
mitigate the risk that a customer will understand an activity to be, or to carry the 
protections of, a regulated activity where this is not the case. Where regulated 
firms do undertake unregulated activities, as noted in the Guidance on Securing 
Customers’ Interests, the obligation to secure customers’ interests applies to a 
firm in the conduct of its affairs. Firms should view good culture and a commitment 
to securing customers’ interests as being central to its relationship with its 
customers, irrespective of the regulatory status of the product or service in 
question. Good culture and a commitment to securing customers’ interests does 
not turn on or off depending on the legal or regulatory status of the business that a 
regulated firm does with its customers. 

Definition of unregulated activities 
Standards for Business Regulations -   Regulation 3  
Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulations 72   &   73  

2.3.3  
Unregulated activities is defined in the Code as the provision of financial services, 
which are not otherwise regulated activities, to consumers in the State. Therefore, 
the unregulated activities requirements, as set out in the Standards for Business 
Regulations, apply to regulated entities when providing unregulated financial 
products and services. Similarly, additional disclosure requirements in the 
Consumer Protection Regulations also apply where a regulated entity is providing 
unregulated financial products and services. The Supporting Standards for 
Business and Consumer Protection Regulations do not apply when regulated 
entities provide non-financial products and services such as, for example, the sale 
of clothing.  

Mitigating the risk of customers misunderstanding regulatory status  
Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulation 5(h)    

2.3.4  
To meet the obligation under this Regulation, when providing unregulated 
financial products or services, firms must consider if there is a risk that customers 

                                                                 
17  Central Bank of Ireland (2022).  Central Bank review identifies evidence of increasing levels of under-insurance in 
the home insurance market . Available at:  https://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/central-bank-revi e w -
identifies-evidence-of-increasing-levels-of-under-insurance-in-the-home-insurance-market .    

[Page 24]
 

24 
 

may misunderstand the regulatory status of the unregulated products and services 
that the firm provides and take appropriate steps to mitigate associated risks. This 
should include consideration of the potential impact that any misunderstanding or 
confusion could have on consumers, which will depend on the nature of the 
product or services and potential for harm or loss to the consumer.  

2.3.5  
For example, a regulated firm may want to undertake complex high-risk 
investment activities that are unregulated, such as the sale of non-transferable 
loan notes. These complex high-risk investment activities present a significant risk 
of misunderstanding or confusion for consumers as some of their features are 
similar to regulated investment products. In terms of the potential impact of 
customer misunderstanding or confusion - a consumer of such an unregulated 
product might incorrectly assume, for example, that they are entitled to statutory 
levels of compensation available to ‘eligible clients’ in the event that the firm is 
unable to return money or investment instruments it owes to consumers who 
invested with it. In such cases, the risk that consumers will misunderstand the 
regulatory status of the unregulated product or service is very high, and it could be 
challenging to effectively mitigate the associated risks. 

2.3.6  
However, there may be cases where it will be possible for the risks associated with 
the provision of unregulated activities of regulated firms to be mitigated by firms. 
This will most likely occur where the risk of misunderstanding and the potential for 
harm or loss to the consumer is low. For example, a regulated firm may choose to 
provide ancillary services such the provision of a tax return service alongside its 
regulated activities. Given the nature of the service that is being offered, there is a 
relatively low risk of misunderstanding by the customer as to the nature of the 

offering and the relative potential for financial loss is low. In these scenarios, we 
expect firms to comply with the requirements in the Code 18 , for example, clearly 
stating on marketing material that the service is not a regulated financial product 
(in line with the text of the required warning) and displaying the service and 
accompanying material on a webpage that is separate to its regulated financial 
products.    

How firms can clearly distinguish between unregulated and regulated activities 
2.3.7  
To ensure that they are clearly distinguishing between unregulated and regulated 
activities firms:  

                                                                 
18  Consumer Protection Regulations,  Regulations 72 ,   73 ;  Standards for Business Regulations   Regulation 5(h) .  

[Page 25]
 

25 
 

•   Should clearly and effectively communicate the regulatory status of the 
activity or product, and not imply that the activity or product is regulated if 
it is unregulated;  

•   Should provide appropriate disclosures and risk warnings in a prominent 
position on information provided to clients. ‘Information’ includes but is not 
limited to brochures, information memoranda, webpages and other 
marketing materials; 

•   May only use regulatory disclosure statements in communication with 
consumers where such communications relate solely to a regulated 
activity. When engaging in unregulated activities, information provided to 
the consumer, including any marketing material, cannot include reference 
to the firm being authorised/regulated by the Central Bank of Ireland. 

Branding and use of websites 
2.3.8  
Firms must ensure that the use of branding does not contribute to the risk that 
customers will misunderstand an activity or product to be, or to carry the 
protections of, a regulated activity where this is not the case. This risk of confusion 
is increased in particular where a product or service has similar characteristics to a 
regulated financial services product or service provided by a group-entity with 
similar branding.  

Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 72    

2.3.9  
This regulation requires information on regulated and unregulated activities to be 
kept on separate webpages on a website.  

2.3.10  
Consideration should also be given to the use of branding on website pages and the 
potential for this to create confusion on the regulatory status of products and 
services. It should be clear to customers when they are moving outside the 
regulatory space. This can be supported through the provision of disclosures and 
warnings but firms also need to consider if the use of branding can contribute to 
confusion or potential customer confusion. In some cases it may not be appropriate 
to utilise branding on website pages relating to unregulated activities. In 
determining whether it is appropriate to use firm branding on website pages, firms 
should give consideration to the risk and impact of confusion on the regulatory 
status of products and services in line with the guidance provided in section 2.3.9. 
above. 

2.3.11  
This approach should also be applied where firms use apps to provide regulated 
and unregulated activities, products or services and information on these.  

 

[Page 26]
 

26 
 

2.4.   Financial Abuse 

Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulations 4(1)(f)  &   10    
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 2  

2.4.1  
To ensure that firms are taking the necessary steps to protect their systems and 
their customers from financial abuse including frauds and scams, the Standards for 
Business require firms to control and manage their affairs and systems to counter 
the risks to customers of financial abuse. 

2.4.2  
This Standard for Business is complemented by a Supporting Standard for Business 
on financial abuse, which includes a requirement for firms to communicate clearly 
to their customers the risk of financial abuse, including where the firm is aware of 
the occurrence of digital frauds or scams, the supports available and the actions 
customers can take where they are a victim of financial abuse. 

2.4.3  
The definition of financial abuse in the Code has two elements. The first addresses 
‘the wrongful or unauthorised taking, withholding, appropriation, or use of a 
consumer’s money, assets, or property’. This describes a fraud or scam. The people 
who commit such frauds or scams are typically strangers to the victim. 19  

2.4.4  
The second part addresses any act or omission by a person, including through the 
use of a power of attorney, guardianship, or any other authority regarding a 
consumer, to –  

i.  
obtain control, through deception, intimidation or undue influence, over 
the consumer’s money, assets or property, or  

ii.  
wrongfully interfere with or deny the consumer’s ownership, use, 
benefit or possession of the consumer’s money, assets or property; 

The people who commit this type of financial abuse are typically known to the 
victim. 

2.4.5  
The definition of financial abuse is not restricted to specific types of financial abuse 
that may occur. This definition extends to emerging threats such as AI-driven fraud 
(e.g. synthetic identity fraud, deep fake scams, AI voice cloning scams) and digital 
exploitation (e.g. financial abuse through digital payments or social media financial 
scams). The requirements in the Code apply where the circumstances of financial 
abuse meet the criteria set out in the definition. This ensures that the application 
of the relevant protections for consumers of firms are sufficiently broad to capture 

                                                                 
19  Safeguarding Ireland (2024).  Challenges and opportunities in preventing financial abuse – Moving Forward and 
Leaving No One Behind . Available at:  https://safeguardingireland.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/Challenges-
and-Opportunities-in-Preventing-Financial-Abuse-Adult-Safeguarding-Day-7th-Nov-2024.pdf    

[Page 27]
 

27 
 

the many different incidences of financial abuse that may occur. Examples that are 
captured within the definition of financial abuse in the Code include: 

•   Elder financial exploitation 20    

•   Identity theft  

•   Unauthorised payment fraud; sharing of credentials (pins, passwords)   

•   Coercive control 

•   Financial exploitation by caregivers 

•   Economic control or abuse in intimate relationships or 

•   Financial neglect. 

This is an non-exhaustive list provided to show that many specific types of financial 
abuse are captured within our definition of financial abuse.  

Scope of the financial abuse requirements 
Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulations 2(3)   and   10   

2.4.6  
In the Code, firms have an obligation towards their customers who are consumers 
to counter the risks of financial abuse. Potential customers are not included in the 
scope of the requirement. A firm’s financial abuse obligation is only towards its 
existing customers.   

Clear and Timely Notification of Financial Fraud  
Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulation 10(d)  

2.4.7  
Firms need to counter the risk of financial abuse to customers who are consumers. 
Where firms are aware of any digital frauds or deception connected to its affairs, 
or specifically relevant to the sector in which the firm is operating, they must notify 
its consumers through ‘clear and timely’ communications. The firm’s response 
needs to be proportionate to the probability of risk to the customer and the 
potential level of harm should the risk materialise. Timely communication in this 
context, is information that the firm delivers as soon as it is aware of the potential 
digital fraud or deception and have considered the probability of the risk and harm 
materialising for customers.  
 

                                                                 
20  US Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (2024)  Elder Financial Exploitation: Threat Pattern & Trend 
Information, June 2022 to June 2023 . Virginia: US Treasury. Available at: 
https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/FTA_Elder_Financial_Exploitation_508Final.pdf.   

[Page 28]
 

28 
 

Section - 3   Guidance on the Consumer Protection Regulations 

3.1.1  
As noted in section 1.2, the Consumer Protection Regulations set out cross-
sectoral requirements applying across all sectors, and other sector specific 
requirements applying to the provision of Consumer Banking, Credit and Arrears, 
Insurance and Investments. These requirements apply to the regulated business of 
firms conducted with customers who meet the definition of ‘consumer’ i.e. 
individuals and small businesses. 

3.2.   Knowing the Consumer and Suitability  

3.2.1  
To offer products and services that meet their customers’ needs, firms must have a 
comprehensive understanding of their customers’ financial needs and objectives, 
and must ensure effective processes are in place for assessing suitability.  

3.2.2  
Firms are required to comply with data protection regulations 21  in respect of all 
data processing activity required by the Code. Data gathered for the purposes of 
assessing suitability should be used solely for the purpose for which it was 
gathered and cannot subsequently be processed for other purposes, such as 
marketing, without the consent of the consumer. 

3.2.3  
Firms are required to conduct a thorough suitability and assessment process 
before offering any financial service or product, thereby minimising the risk of 
unsuitable recommendations.  

3.3.   Sustainability Preferences  

Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulations 16 ,  17   &   18  

3.3.1  
Increasingly, environmental and sustainability considerations are important 
considerations for consumers and can play a role in consumer decision-making in 
determining which financial product or service to choose. Within that context, the 
Code includes a number of requirements in relation to customers’ sustainability 
preferences.  

3.3.2  
Sustainability preferences with regard to a financial service are required to be 
gathered, where relevant. The statement of suitability is required to identify where 
a financial product or service meets any sustainability preferences gathered from 
the consumer. However, the assessment of the suitability of a financial product or 
service for a consumer should exclude assessment of information on sustainability 
preferences. The rationale for setting out the requirement in this way is so that 

                                                                 
21  Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection 
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and 
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation). 

[Page 29]
 

29 
 

customers’ sustainability preferences do not over-ride consumers’ needs and 
objectives, personal circumstances, financial situation and attitude to risk. 

3.3.3  
In terms of the sequencing of the process for gathering and utilising information on 
sustainability preferences firms will: 

1.   Gather information on the consumer’s sustainability preferences, where 
relevant, as part of the process of gathering information required under 
Regulation 16   which will include information on the consumer’s needs and 
objectives, personal circumstances, financial situation and where relevant 
attitude to risk. 

2.   Assess suitability and select suitable product(s) for the consumer based on 
their needs and objectives, personal circumstances, financial situation and 
attitude to risk in line with   Regulation 17 .  

3.   Determine if any of these products have sustainability features that meet the 
sustainability preferences gathered from the consumer. 

4.   Provide a statement of suitability in line with   Regulation 18 ,  which sets out 

products identified as suitable, based on the criteria considered in step 2, and 
identify where these meet any sustainability preferences gathered from the 
consumer. 

3.3.4  
Notwithstanding the requirement set out in   Regulation 16 ,  it is important for firms 
to note that, where the financial product or service being sought does not and 
could not have any sustainability features, firms are not required to collect 
information on consumers’ sustainability preferences. Nor are firms required to 

reflect information on sustainability features in the statement of suitability as this 
is not appropriate to the nature of the product or service.  

Statement of suitability to be provided 
Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulations 16(11)   &   18    

3.3.5  
When setting out in the statement of suitability the various reasons why a financial 
product or service is considered to be suitable, the Central Bank expects this to 
include a clear explanation of how the financial product or service meets, where 
relevant, the consumer’s needs and objectives, personal circumstances and 
financial situation. It should also detail the reasoning behind selecting a specific 
financial product or service ensuring clear justification for the advice given. 
Certain statements such as noting that a financial product or service is suitable 
because it aligns with the consumers’ risk tolerance is not sufficient. It is more 

[Page 30]
 

30 
 

important to state, for example, the financial product or service’s risk 
categorisation and explain how it aligns with the consumer’s risk tolerance. 22   

3.3.6  
If a consumer refuses to provide relevant information, then it follows that it is not 
possible to properly assess suitability and, as set out in   Regulation 16(11) ,  the 
consumer should be informed that as the firm does not have the relevant 
information necessary to assess suitability, the firm cannot offer, recommend, 
arrange or provide the financial product or service sought. 

3.4.   Conflicts of Interest and Information about Remuneration  

3.4.1  
Conflicts of interest may occur when a firm’s commercial or financial interests are 
not aligned with their duty to act to secure customers’ interests. Firms are required 
to mitigate this risk by identifying, disclosing, and managing any potential conflicts 
that might influence their advice or services.  

3.4.2  
Transparency regarding remuneration is crucial to ensure customers are fully 
aware of the incentives received by the firm and to understand potential bias that 
may affect the advice they receive.  

Disclosure of fees, commissions etc. by intermediaries 
Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulations 30   -   32    

3.4.3  
Regulation 32   requires an intermediary to make available on its website (or where 
it does not operate a website, in its public offices), a summary of the details 
(including an explanation of the arrangement) for any fee, commission, other 
reward or remuneration receivable from a regulated firm. The intention of this 
regulation is to make commission arrangements transparent to consumers, 

particularly where an intermediary has several commission arrangements 
available to them in respect of the products or services that they are offering to the 
consumer. The aim of the provision is to encourage product producers and 
intermediaries to develop commission arrangements that are aligned with the 
consumer’s interests and to help mitigate the risk of commission bias.  

3.4.4  
An intermediary’s level of commission must be displayed as an individual number 
as opposed to a range, where possible. However, when an intermediary’s level of 
commission depends on individual circumstances and can only be displayed as a 
range, the intermediary must explain the arrangement in the summary and the 
basis on which the level of commission within the range is decided must be 

                                                                 
22  European Securities and Markets Authority (2023)  Questions and Answers on MiFID II and MiFIR investor 
protection and intermediaries topics . Available at: 
https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/esma35-43-
349_mifid_ii_qas_on_investor_protection_topics.pdf .  – see question 10, 1 Suitability and appropriateness page 
44. 

[Page 31]
 

31 
 

disclosed, e.g., intermediary’s discretion, whether the level of commission is 
negotiable, length of time of the policy, length of investment period, etc. In that 
regard, the disclosure must specify which of the factors is relevant in respect of 
each arrangement. 

3.5.   Digitalisation 

Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulations 38 - 43  

3.5.1  
Digitalisation in financial services has brought many benefits for firms and 
consumers and has the potential to bring many more. It can also bring challenges 
and risks for firms and consumers. We want to ensure that firms support their 
customers to harness the benefits and take action to mitigate risks.  

3.5.2  
The Code is technology neutral. This means that the Code does not seek to 
regulate the specific technology used by firms nor the choice of that technology. 
Regardless of the technology used by firms to interact with consumers, the 
obligations of the Code must be met.  

3.5.3  
However, because of the risks to consumers associated with digital technologies, 
the Code contains some specific requirements for firms who use digital technology 
to provide financial services. The material below provides guidance on a number of 
these specific requirements. The guidance set out in this section also includes a 
number of topics which speak to general aspects of digitalisation that firms may 
deploy, for example structuring and layering of information and filtering. While 
these are not specific requirements of the Digitalisation section in the Consumer 
Protection Regulations, they are included under this guidance heading, given that 
they are relevant to the broader digitalisation topic.   

Digital platforms 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 2  

3.5.4  
Many of the Code’s ‘digitalisation’ requirements and some others across the 
Consumer Protection Regulations apply where a firm is engaging with a consumer 
using a ‘digital platform’ e.g. an online system (such as a website) through which 
contracts can be concluded to provide financial services to consumers. These 
include requirements for firms to ensure such platforms are designed to be easy to 
use and navigate with appropriate supports provided, that the technology is 
tested, and that they produce consistent and objective outcomes for consumers.  

3.5.5  
Firms using digital platforms, and other digital means of communication and 
engagement, must also ensure that they comply with all relevant Code standards 
and requirements. For example, the information provided to customers on digital 
platforms and communications must equally be clear, accurate, and up to date. 

[Page 32]
 

32 
 

Firms using digital technology must also ensure that their products and services 
and their digital engagement practices 23  are not designed to unfairly exploit the 
behaviours, habits, preferences, or biases of customers leading to customer 
detriment.    

Guidance to be provided on the use and navigation of digital platform  
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 40  

3.5.6  
If a firm is using a digital platform to conduct business with consumers, the firm 
must give guidance on how to navigate the digital platform. This guidance should 
take account of the profile of the customer base and the complexity of the platform 
and should align with the principles of informing effectively in the Code. For 
example, the use of infographics and video explainers may assist customers in 
navigating digital platforms.  

Ease of use and accessibility 
3.5.7  
There are various techniques and practices that can be utilised by firms to ensure 
digital services and delivery channels are easy to use and navigate and support 
informed decision-making. 

3.5.8  
Firms should identify ways to ensure their digital services and delivery channels 
are accessible. Firms should look to the NDA’s Toolkits 24  for advice on how to 
design their digital platform with accessibility in mind. Firms should also consider 
the principles contain in the EU’s Web Accessibility Directive. 25  Firms should 
consider the following: 

•   Screen readers  
Can screen readers like JAWS, NVDA, and VoiceOver operate with the 
digital platform? 26   

•   Voice commands  
Are functionalities on the digital platform compatible with voice 
commands? 27   

                                                                 
23  These tools include behavioural techniques, differential marketing, gamification, design elements or design 
features that intentionally or unintentionally engage with retail investors on digital platforms as well as the 
analytical and technological tools and methods. 
24  National Disability Authority (n.d.)  NDA Toolkits  [online]. Available at:   https://nda.ie/publications-and-
resources/toolkits.   
25  European Commission (2023)  Web Accessibility Directive . Available at:  https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/web-accessibility-directive-standards-and-harmonisation .  
26  See for example the European Commission’s Shaping Europe’s Digital Future is designed to allow 
compatibility with these screen readers. European Commission (n.d.)  Accessibility Statement  [online]. Available 
at: https://digital-decade-desi.digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/page/accessibility-statement. 
27  W3 Web Accessibility Initiative (2024).  Speech Recognition  [online]. Available at: 
https://www.w3.org/WAI/perspective-videos/voice/.  

[Page 33]
 

33 
 

•   Keyboard Navigation  
Can all functions on the digital platform be used without a mouse? 28   

•   Font size 
Is the font at least 12-point font size? Can users request an increase in font 
size? 29   

•   Design layout  
Does the layout work on a range of devices for example phone, tablet and 
computer? 30  

Structuring and layering of information 
3.5.9  
Structuring and layering describe the separation of information into different 
interconnected layers that allow a consumer to gradually access information of 
deeper relevance depending on the options or links they select. Layering can help 
to break down complex information for consumers, and promote easier navigation 
and the representation of information in a more manageable format, so that 
consumers can access the information they need, better understand the 
information available, take the appropriate time to consider and ultimately make 
informed decisions.  

3.5.10  
Layering can help to ensure that all relevant information is not presented to a 
customer at once, but that through clear and intuitive design, relevant information 
is identified as available and is easily accessible by the customer. 

3.5.11  
Features such as tabs on websites, drop-down menus or the use of collapsible 
sections, where headline or more basic information is initially displayed, with the 
functionality for the customer to expand the section to access more information 
can assist the consumer in identifying the information they need and progressively 
access further detail on a product or service.  

Scrolling and hyperlinks 
3.5.12  
When offering financial services or products digitally, firms must ensure that 
consumers are encouraged to access and read all relevant and important 
information. This includes designing digital platforms that facilitate easy 
navigation and promote a thorough review of the content. Sticky navigation bars 

                                                                 
28  Centre for Excellence in Universal Design (2023).  Customer Communications Toolkit for Services to the Public — 
A Universal Design Approach . 94 Available at:  https://universaldesign.ie/uploads/publications/Customer-
Communications-Toolkit-2023-PDF_Final.pdf_2024-09-26-162804_exoy.pdf .  
29  Centre for Excellence in Universal Design (2023).  Customer Communications Toolkit for Services to the Public — 
A Universal Design Approach . 29 Available at:  https://universaldesign.ie/uploads/publications/Customer-
Communications-Toolkit-2023-PDF_Final.pdf_2024-09-26-162804_exoy.pdf .  
30  Centre for Excellence in Universal Design (2023).  Customer Communications Toolkit for Services to the Public — 
A Universal Design Approach . 115 Available at:  https://universaldesign.ie/uploads/publications/Customer-
Communications-Toolkit-2023-PDF_Final.pdf_2024-09-26-162804_exoy.pdf .  

[Page 34]
 

34 
 

(those that stay at the top or other designated area) that follow the user down a 
digital platform can keep important links and tools accessible, enhancing the user 
experience, and encouraging deeper engagement with content. Additionally 
placing compelling calls to action and reminders to ‘scroll for more information’ at 
key points can prompt users to continue reading. Careful structuring and layout of 
content on digital platforms, including the use of consistent, clear headings and 
subheadings, can ensure that all necessary information is reviewed.  

3.5.13  
Hyperlinks should be clearly labelled to reflect the importance, nature, and 
relevance of the information they direct consumers to. For example, this could 
include the use of labels like ‘Important Terms and Conditions’. Firms should be 
cautious when using hyperlinks to ensure these do not direct consumers away 
from critical information. Firms should avoid the fragmentation of important 
details set out in multiple hyperlinks, which can obscure the consumers’ overall 
understanding. Important details should be kept together as much as possible. 
Providers should assess the effectiveness of hyperlinks by monitoring click-
through rates and related consumer behaviour and make changes as required.   

Filtering 
3.5.14  
Filtering of products on websites entails providing functionality where users can 
narrow a list of products or services, based on set criteria or specific product 
attributes. It is a feature commonly used across a broad range of sectors to support 
consumers’ product selection and decision-making.  

3.5.15  
Filtering functionality can be a useful tool for consumers of financial products and 
services in terms of accessing information on relevant products, comparing and 
understanding their features and ultimately selecting the most suitable product for 
their needs. Research has found that where filtering is not available, consumers 
tend to choose products at the top of the page displayed, that do not necessarily 
align with their needs. 31   

3.5.16  
When a range of products or options are available firms should consider providing 
functionality to allow consumers to filter the range of products presented based on 
criteria selected by the customer and/or change the order of the products 
displayed. For example, personal loan products could be filtered based on APRs, 
loan term, sustainable features etc. and displayed from the lowest interest rate to 
the higher interest rate (see box below for an illustrative example).  

                                                                 
31  Financial Conduct Authority (2015). High-Cost Short-Term Credit Price Comparison Websites A behavioural 
study for the Financial Conduct Authority. Available at  https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/consultation/cp-
15-33-behavioural-study.pdf    

[Page 35]
 

35 
 

Box 1: Filtering 

A firm provides a number of personal loan options on its website. To help consumers identify 
which product is right for them, the firm develops an interactive table that allows consumers 
to filter and order the products according to their preferences.   

 
 

Consent in a digital context 
3.5.17  
Consent given by the consumer under the Code must be recorded. Where any 
Code requirement requires ‘written consent’ this can be provided in paper formats, 
by email or other electronic formats. Where any Code requirement does not 
specify the form of consent, such consent could also be provided by other means 
including for example via an audio recording of the consumer verbally giving 
consent.  

Durable medium 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 2  

3.5.18  
The definition of durable medium is:  

“any instrument that enables a recipient to store information addressed personally 
to the recipient in a way that renders it accessible for future reference for a period 
of time adequate for the purposes of the information and which allows the 
unchanged reproduction of the information stored.”  

3.5.19  
Firms employ various forms of durable medium to ensure consumers receive and 
can retain essential information in an accessible manner. Durable medium includes 
traditional methods such as hard copy documents and letters as well as digital 
formats such as PDFs, emails, and information accessible on mobile apps or online 
platforms. Digital formats can only be considered a durable medium where they 
satisfy all of the criteria set out in the above definition. The text box below 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 36]
 

36 
 

examines how a number of different formats could meet the criteria to be 
considered a durable medium. 

Box 2: Durable mediums 

 

Email  – emails can be addressed to a specific individual and are capable of being 
stored for future use and reference by that individual. They also allow for the 
unchanged reproduction of information contained in them, as they can be stored 
and reproduced unchanged when required. 

Mobile apps  – a mobile app can allow for information to be personally addressed 
to a specific individual, stored for future use and reference. To be considered a 
durable medium it must be possible to ensure that the information from a previous 
point in time, for example, a bank account statement from last year can be 
accessed and reproduced in an unchanged form.   

Online platform  – the criteria for a durable medium could also be potentially met 
by an interactive website or online platform where users can log in to a secure area 
on the firm’s platform, and where it provides information that is addressed to a 
specific individual, which remains accessible in the future by means of the secure 
login and provides the user the ability to generate unchanged reproductions of 
information.  

 

Digital platforms – online decision making 
Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulation 38(d)  

Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulation 4(1)(a)  

3.5.20  
The Supporting Standards for Business on Securing Customers’ Interests require 
firms to take into account the interests of consumers when designing products and 
services, and the methods of delivery, to ensure that their products and services 
are not designed to unfairly exploit the behaviours, habits, preferences, or biases 
of the consumer that could result in customer detriment.  

3.5.21  
Digital platforms should be designed in a way that effectively supports consumers’ 
decision-making and ensures transactions are suitably paced to reduce the risk of 
consumers entering into transactions that may be unsuitable due to the speed and 
ease of the process. Firms should consider the impact the dynamic of online 
transactions can have on consumer decision making and apply pause features 
where the risk of consumers entering into transactions that may be unsuitable due 
to the speed and ease of the online process is high. This risk of this is considered to 

[Page 37]
 

37 
 

be lower where consumers are purposefully online to purchase a financial product 
or service, for example when using an online platform to purchase/renew their car 
insurance. Where a consumer is online for one purpose and is then offered a 
financial product or service, which they had not originally intended to purchase, 
the risk is higher. The box below sets out two examples of such a scenario. 
 
3.5.22  
In completing online transactions, sufficient time should be available to the 
consumer to assess and consider the relevant information so that they are in a 
position to make an informed decision on whether to proceed with the transaction.    

Box 3: Provision of financial services through digital platforms - supporting good online 
decision making 

Buy now pay later (BNPL) 

A consumer is purchasing clothing online. At the payment stage the individual is offered a 
buy now pay later option to split the payment over multiple instalments. The consumer’s 
original intention was to purchase clothing and pay for the item on a debit card. However, 
they may be enticed into entering into a short term credit facility that may not be suitable 
for them due to the speed and ease of the process.   The use of a pause feature with a 
warning statement in such a scenario provides the consumer with the opportunity to 
‘pause’ and consider their decision to enter into a credit agreement (BNPL) before 
proceeding with the transaction. It is of note that a    nationally representative survey 32 , 
conducted by the Central Bank in 2023, showed consumers exhibit a low level of 
understanding of BNPL increasing the risk that the consumer may be entering into an 
agreement that they do not fully understand if they are not given the opportunity to pause 
and make an informed decision. To help ensure that the consumer is making an informed 

decision, the BNPL provider should provide concise clearly visible information to the 
consumer at the point of decision highlighting that the consumer is entering into a credit 
agreement, for example, displaying details on charges and fees, and what the 
consequences are for the consumer in the event of default on subsequent payments.  

Based on research conducted by the Central Bank, presenting concise salient disclosures 
about the key risks of using BNPL within the payment checkout (i.e. made very visible at 
the point of decision making), improves consumers’ ability to make informed choices about 
using BNPL. This research demonstrated that these effects are significant for a nationally 
representative sample of consumers, including consumers who are potentially in 
vulnerable circumstances. 

                                                                 
32  Central Bank of Ireland (2023). Consumer Research Bulletin Buy Now Pay Later Consumer Insights Update. 
Available at:   https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/publications/consumer-protection-
research/consumer-research-bulletin-buy-now-pay-later.pdf?sfvrsn=7ed49d1d_6 .   

[Page 38]
 

38 
 

Figure B provides an illustration of how disclosures can be presented at the payment stage 
and contrasts with Figure A where no risk-related disclosures are presented during 
payment. This demonstrates that effective disclosures can be included without creating 
undue friction to the transaction process. 

Figure A : Without Disclosures 

 

Figure B: With disclosures  

 

 
Insurance as an add-on product  
Where a consumer is purchasing products online, in some instances they may be offered  
insurance cover offered as an add-on – for example gadget insurance when buying a 
smartphone online, or travel insurance cover when purchasing a flight online. This is 
another example of a scenario where consumers may be enticed into purchasing a 
financial product that may not be suitable for their needs due to the speed and ease of the 
process. As a result,  care should be taken to ensure that the consumer has sufficient 

[IMAGE BLOCK]

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 2 images/figures]


[Page 39]
 

39 
 

information and time to make an informed decision about the option to purchase the add-
on insurance through the inclusion of appropriate pause features in the transaction 
process.  

3.6.   Regulatory Disclosure Statements 

Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulation 71(1)    

3.6.1  
This regulation requires that firms include a regulatory disclosure statement as to 
their regulatory status for consumers. This should be displayed on mediums 
including business stationery, webpages and websites that they use in connection 
with their regulated activities.  

3.6.2  
For SMS (text) messages or WhatsApp messages, a regulatory disclosure 
statement is not required where the content does not provide details of financial 
services within the scope of the firms’ regulated activities. For example, SMS 
messages sent to home insurance policyholders when there are weather events 
with instructions on how policyholders can contact a helpline or submit claims do 
not require a regulatory disclosure statement, as these are generic 
communications.  

Trading names 
Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulation 71(4)    

3.6.3  
It is very important that consumers know the legal entity that they are dealing with 
and that they are not confused by the use of trading names. Where a firm has a 
number of trading names, in communications with the consumer, the firm should 
use all trading names linked to the particular product, service, or activity that is 
being referenced. 

Regulatory Disclosure Statement in Advertisements  
Consumer Protection Regulations -   Regulation 71(6)    

3.6.4  
Firms must include a regulatory disclosure statement in advertisements that refer 
to or relate to their regulated activities.  

3.6.5  
Each firm must decide the best place in/on the advertisement for the regulatory 
disclosure statement to appear. The Central Bank recommends the following:  

•   for print advertisements, TV advertisements and online advertisements, the 
regulatory disclosure statement should be placed in a position where it can 
be clearly seen as a standalone, but prominent and legible, statement. If 
information cannot be visually displayed, firms should reduce the amount of 
information in advertisements to improve consumer understanding; and   
 

[Page 40]
 

40 
 

•   for radio advertisements, the regulatory disclosure statement should be 
delivered at a speed that is clear and audible, and fulfils the obligation on 
firms to inform their consumers effectively. Firms should consider whether 
the information is suitable for audio delivery. 33  

3.6.6  
Where an online banner advertisement or pop up advertisement is of a size that 
renders the inclusion of a regulatory disclosure statement impractical, it is 
acceptable to link the web advertisement to a page on the firm’s website on which 
the regulatory disclosure statement is clearly displayed. 

3.7.   Advertising  

3.7.1  
Advertising is a key source of information for consumers. Consumers should 
receive balanced information in relation to advertised products or services and, 
consequently, we expect firms to bear this in mind when designing their 
advertisements and in deciding what information to include. Firms must provide 
information in their advertising that is ‘clear, fair, accurate, and not misleading’. 
Claims and offers in advertising must be balanced with information on for example, 
risks, fees, and charges to enable the consumer to make a fully informed choice. 
Information in advertisements should be current and balanced. Firms should 
discontinue or delete advertisements if they are no longer up-to-date.  

3.7.2  
The obligations in relation to advertising are not limited to those set out in   Chapter  
9   of the Consumer Protection Regulations. When advertising, firms should ensure 
that they are compliant with all other requirements under the Code that might be 
relevant to a firm’s approach to advertising including Informing Effectively, 
Information about Regulatory Status and subject matter specific warning 
statements.  

Scope and application of Advertising requirements 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulations 2   &   74  

3.7.3  
The advertising requirements under the Consumer Protection Regulations apply 
to all formats of advertising. The Code defines an advertisement as: 

“any communication in respect of a regulated entity, which is addressed to the 
consumer public or a section of it, the purpose being to advertise a regulated 
activity or a regulated entity the subject of these Regulations, excluding name 
plaques, material that only communicates the regulated entity’s brand name 
rather than the promotion of a specific financial service, and a prospectus 
drawn up in accordance with the Prospectus Regulation;” 

                                                                 
33  Directive (EU) 2023/2225 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 October 2023 on credit 
agreements for consumers and repealing Directive 2008/48/EC recital 33. 

[Page 41]
 

41 
 

3.7.4  
Advertising can be communicated in a number of ways , which may include:   

•   TV, radio, print, outdoor (billboards, window displays, advertising on buses, 
trains, bus stops and train stations), online advertising (banner/pop-up 
advertising);  

•   social media;  

•   websites;  

•   search engine sponsorships;  

•   promotional materials; and  

•   competitions and advertorials that promote products/services.  

There is an exemption from the advertising rules for ‘sponsorship material’ i.e. 
material that only communicates the regulated entity’s brand name rather than the 
promotion of a specific financial product or service.  

Advertising on social media  
3.7.5  
Communications including advertisements made on social media by a firm are 
subject to the Code’s requirements. In general, advertisements on social media 
includes posts, memes, images and text. These may be in public environments (such 
as Reddit) or may be in private environments (such as Telegram, WhatsApp) but 
firms will need to consider the application of the Code in both scenarios. The 
advertisement could be time-bound such as a story on Instagram but will still have 
to comply with the Code.  

3.7.6  
A ‘finfluencer’ is someone who uses social media to promote, give financial advice 
or market financial products. ‘Finfluencers’ must comply with the Code if there is a 
commercial relationship (payment or other commercial relationship) between the 
‘finfluencer’ and the firm. For example, a firm pays a finfluencer to post promoting 
their firm’s service or product. The finfluencer’s post in effect encourages 
followers to use the firm’s products or services. In such scenarios, the firm is 
responsible for the posts made by the finfluencer. The firm must ensure that the 
posts comply with the Code. Firms should be aware that posts are a type of 
advertisement under the Code and will need to comply with advertising  
requirements. Other persons who publish communications on social media under 
an outsourcing arrangement with the firm must also comply with the Code’s 
requirements.  

Advertising Governance 
Standards for Business Regulations –   Regulations 4(1)(a)   &   11(a)   

[Page 42]
 

42 
 

3.7.7  
Firms must have appropriate governance arrangements in place for all aspects of 
product development, promotion, distribution, and post-sale services of their 
advertising to ensure they comply with the Code.  

3.7.8  
It is important that the Board and Senior Management, compliance function and 
marketing function (as appropriate), work closely together to ensure that a 
finalised advertisement complies with the Code.  

3.7.9  
Firms should have appropriate compliance arrangements for advertising. This 
includes monitoring advertising on an ongoing basis to ensure ongoing compliance 
with the Code, developing processes for issue escalation, evaluating advertising 
campaigns regularly, and maintaining evidence of these evaluations.  

3.7.10  
Where a firm chooses to launch a new product or service, the decisions around 
how the product or service shall be advertised should be considered in light of the 
advertising requirements of the Code. 

3.7.11  
Firms should consider the following points in relation to systems and controls for 
advertising:   

•   Does management have a clear strategy for advertising/marketing? Does 
the strategy include clear accountability for the design and approval of 
advertisements?    

•   Do firms have appropriate processes and controls in place to highlight the 
effectiveness or deficiencies of their systems and controls, in order to 
ensure that the advertising approval system is operating effectively?  

•   Is there regular audit testing to ensure that processes and procedures are 
accessible, are working correctly, and are being used in practice by those 
who design and approve advertisements?  

•   Where audit tests such as the above are being carried out, is there a detailed 
record of how often, by whom (noting their official role/function) and when 
the next test is to be carried out?   

•   Are there relevant controls that allow for the release of advertisements only 
after confirmation that the advertisement is compliant with the advertising 
requirements of the Code?  

•   Are there additional controls/checks in place when changing processes and 
procedures or to allow for staff turnover etc.?  

•   Are there adequate control mechanisms in place where third parties are 
engaged?   

[Page 43]
 

43 
 

•   Is there a process for complaints analysis e.g., a formal process of notifying 
relevant staff internally where advertising issues arise? Are these issues 
being appropriately dealt with and escalated within the firm?  

•   Where IT systems are used to record and store policies, procedures and 
issues arising, firms are responsible for the efficient management of such 
systems by ensuring that records are adequate and complete.  

•   Is there a formal log of training on the rules and processes for staff that 
design and approve advertisements?    

3.7.12  
It is recommended that procedures are reviewed at least annually and updated to 
address any significant or recurring issues that have occurred within the preceding 
year.   

Presentation of advertisements 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 77(1)  

3.7.13  
This Regulation requires that the design, presentation and content on the 
information in advertisements is clear, fair and not misleading. In terms of 
presentation, firms should ensure that;  

•   the text is not covered with watermarks;   

•   there is no page bleeding. 34  The text must fit the space assigned to the 
advertisement to ensure that no information required by the Code e.g. 
regulatory disclosure statement, has been obscured or omitted in any way 
because of formatting. An example of this would be an advertisement on a 
bus where the space allowed may obscure or omit some of the regulatory 
information required; and   

•   the entire content of an advertisement should not potentially mislead a 
consumer into thinking that the Central Bank is endorsing the firm or any 
of its products or services.  

Advertisement to identify that it is an advertisement  
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 79  

3.7.14  
This requirement applies to all advertisements. Finfluencers and firms must 
identify advertisements as advertisements.  

3.7.15  
For example, where a firm advertises on social media, the communication should 
contain the characters  #ad  to make it clear it is an advertisement. Where the 
context or accompanying  #ad  does not make it clear, influencers are required to 

                                                                 
34  Page bleeding is where the advertisement is bigger than the space permitted.    

[Page 44]
 

44 
 

label their sponsored content with hashtags such as  #Sponsored , or  #Promotion  
to indicate that a post is a paid advertisement.  

3.7.16  
In a blog post or Instagram story, the disclosure that it is an advertisement should 
be prominently placed at the beginning of the content, rather than hidden at the 
end of a post or in a separate section.  

Benefits and risks 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 80  

3.7.17  
If a firm highlights the benefits attached to a product or service, firms should also 
give any risks equal prominence. For example, where the benefits of a particular 
product or service are included in the main body of an advertisement, the risks 
should also be in the main body. Both should be in the same font size, colour, etc. 
We have seen examples where an advertisement may highlight the benefits of a 
product or service and then include the risks in the small print. Firms are reminded 
that advertisements should provide balanced messages about risks and benefits in 
the main body of the advertisement.  

3.7.18  
Advertisements should not exaggerate any benefits or create unrealistic 
expectations by omitting information on risks. An advertisement should also make 
full disclosure of all material information, including fees and charges that a 
consumer is likely to pay, in the main body of an advertisement. A restriction in 
advertising space or the cost of buying an advertisement is not an acceptable 
argument to avoid effective and balanced communication.    

3.7.19  
We have encountered instances where images in an advertisement are not 
consistent with the product or service, which is misleading to consumers. Images in 
an advertisement should not imply a benefit that the advertised product or service 
does not provide (e.g. insurance cover for an event that is not covered by the policy 
advertised).   

3.7.20  
Where firms use warning statements in advertisements, they should be consistent 
with the features of the product or service being advertised. Firms must explain 
benefits or investment returns to ensure that the advertisement is clear, fair, and 
accurate and that the consumer is not misled. For example, should an investment 
product only yield a promised return of capital on a particular date, the warning 
should clearly inform the consumer that an early encashment could result in the 
consumer losing some or all of their capital investment.  

3.7.21  
Retail intermediaries should ensure that advertisements are not misleading in 
relation to the firm’s ability to provide the advertised product or service. Where an 
intermediary has indirect access to one or more product provider because of its 

[Page 45]
 

45 
 

appointment with another intermediary this should clearly be stated in the 
advertisement. 

Customer profile examples in advertising   
3.7.22  
Firms are reminded that all price-specific advertising must contain the key 
information and qualifying criteria for who can avail of the price quoted in the 
advertisement to meet the requirements of the Code. For example in cases where 
firms are using customer profiles in insurance advertisements, it must be clear who 
can avail of the price quoted in the advertisement.  

Box 4: Price specific advertising and qualifying criteria 

TV 
TV advertisement voiceovers can be used to relay the key information and 
qualifying criteria relating to the content of the advertisement. Firms can also use 
TV screenshots to display key information and qualifying criteria to allow the 
consumer to read the information with ease. A viewer should be able to easily 
understand the verbal or written content on first viewing. 

Websites  
All key information and qualifying criteria about availing of the product or service 
at the price quoted must be stated alongside the price quoted to meet the 
requirements of the Code.  

Social media 
Key information and qualifying criteria relating to the advertised product or 
service should be available on a product specific webpage linked directly 35  from 

the online/social media page to meet the Code’s requirements. 36    

Where a firm makes reference to ‘terms and conditions’ in an online advertisement 
it is recommended that the advertisement includes a direct link to the relevant 
terms and conditions webpage. 
  

3.8.   Errors Resolution  

3.8.1  
It is important that firms take ownership and responsibility for managing errors 
that affect consumers, and that they have in place adequate governance 
arrangements to effectively identify, track, manage, and resolve errors. As detailed 
in Section 2.5 of the Securing Customers’ Interests Guidance, it is expected that 

                                                                 
35  Firms should also look to the Digitalisation Guidance on hyperlinks. See also Consumer Protection 
Regulations,  Regulation 76 .  
36   Consumer Protection Regulations,  Regulations 80  and  81 .  

[Page 46]
 

46 
 

firms will secure their customers’ interests in the design and implementation of 
processes and procedures for the handling of errors.  

Robust governance arrangements required for errors handling   
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 96  

3.8.2  
The governance arrangements and procedures that a firm puts in place for the 
effective handling of errors should reflect the nature and scale of their business, 
although certain arrangements are required at a minimum e.g. arrangements for 
the proper oversight of the handling of errors.  

3.8.3  
The Central Bank considers that firms should have regard to the overall customer 
impact of the error, or whether the error is systemic in nature, in determining their 
appetite for the types of errors to be escalated to the board/senior management. 
Some of the factors that could be considered: 

•   The number of customers impacted relative to the number of customers 
availing of the product  

•   The nature of the product(s) impacted by the error  

•   The known/potential remediation amounts involved 

•   Whether systemic issues arise in relation to the error 

•   The potential for negative publicity that could damage trust and confidence 
in the firm/financial services sector  

•   The impact (if any) on other products/services  

•   The timeframe over which the error occurred  

•   The timeframe in which the error is estimated to be resolved  

•   Whether the error constitutes a breach of a regulatory obligation and the 
potential need to disclose the issue to the Central Bank  

•   Whether a number of small errors, taken together, could be considered 
‘significant’. 

3.9.   Complaints Resolution  

3.9.1  
In addition to the guidance provided in Section 2.5 – Dealing with Errors or 
Mistakes and Customer Complaints of Securing Customers’ Interests Guidance, 
the guidance set out under this section details the obligations on firms in recording, 
managing and resolving complaints from consumers. These include provision of 
clear information to the consumer, accessible procedures for the handling of 
complaints, and prompt resolution of complaints.  

[Page 47]
 

47 
 

Proper categorisation of complaints  
3.9.2  
Proper complaints handling requires that regulated firms correctly categorise 
complaints, as distinct from queries, or negotiations on price. The Central Bank 
expects firms to adopt a substance over form approach to mitigate the risk of 
issues being excluded from the complaints process.  

3.9.3  
The Central Bank expects firms to decide on a case-by-case basis whether any 
expression of dissatisfaction regarding price is part of the negotiation of the price, 
or whether it constitutes a complaint. A firm must have regard to its obligation to 
implement the formal complaints procedure for consumers as outlined in the Code. 
This applies whether or not the consumer ultimately decides to purchase the 
product at the price quoted. 

3.9.4  
All expressions of dissatisfaction by consumers must be clearly categorised and 
addressed to avoid firms bypassing the complaints resolution process required by 
the Code and to ensure their compliance with their obligation to act honestly, fairly 
and professionally.  

3.10.   Specific Requirements for Credit Institutions  

Consumer Impact of Closing, Moving or Merging Branches 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 159    

3.10.1  
The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that credit institutions have 
considered the consumer impact of closing, moving, or merging branches and that 
as part of those considerations, they assess the suitability of alternative 
arrangements and provide relevant information to their consumers. In this 
regulation, a ‘branch’ means a local branch which consumers can attend onsite for 
the purposes of being provided with financial services. 

3.10.2  
There are two main aspects to this regulation;  

(a)   A set of requirements that credit institutions must comply with in terms of 
notification to the Central Bank; and  

(b)   A set of requirements that credit institutions must comply with in terms of 
notification to consumers that are customers of the credit institution, 
through the relevant branch and the wider community.    

3.10.3  
When providing notification to the Central Bank of the decision to close, move or 
merge branches, a credit institution must meet the requirements set out in this 
Regulation. These requirements include informing the Central Bank of any 
relevant planned steps or subsequent developments, which have the potential to 
affect consumers during the period from the date of notification to the Central 
Bank to the date of closure, merger, or move. These planned steps or 

[Page 48]
 

48 
 

developments should include, but are not limited to, any upcoming or future 
developments that the credit institution may have planned that may exacerbate or 
alleviate the impact on consumers. Examples could include future changes to 
access or services that may be under consideration.  

3.10.4  
Subject to notifying the Central Bank when the decision to close, merge or move 
has been made (which must be made at least 2 months in advance of notifying 
affected consumers), the credit institution is required to give at least 6 months’ 
individual notice to every consumer that is a customer of the relevant branch of 
the credit institution. The notification period runs from when the credit institution 
notifies consumers about the closure, merger, or move of the branch. Credit 
institutions must complete all the business of the branch prior to the closure, 
merger or move or, alternatively inform the relevant consumers how continuity of 
an equivalent service will be provided through another branch.   

3.10.5  
Where a credit institution intends to close a branch, it is required to carry out an 
assessment of the anticipated impact of the closure on consumers that are 
customers of the credit institution, with regard to (a) access to financial services 
and (b) the range of financial services available to the consumer. The assessment is 
required to assess the suitability of alternative arrangements, and where those 
alternative arrangements are suitable, the credit institution’s plans for transferring 
affected consumers that are customers of the credit institution to those 
arrangements, including any plans necessary for consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances. The assessment should consider all aspects that may have an 
impact on consumers including the following:  

•   Consideration of customers in vulnerable circumstances impacted 
(including any proactive measures being taken)  

•   Access to alternative banking services - other branch and ATM (where 
relevant) services nearby and information around any services currently 
available that may not be available following a branch closure.  

3.10.6  
The assessment must be approved by the board of directors, or the entity or 
persons controlling the regulated entity.    

3.10.7  
The credit institution must publish the assessment on its website. They must also 
arrange publication in a local newspaper that the credit institution has carried out 
an assessment and indicate where individuals can access a copy of the assessment. 
They must also place notices in the relevant branch indicating that the assessment 
has been undertaken and where it can be accessed. In drafting the notice, credit 
institutions should consider what groups of people use this particular branch and 

[Page 49]
 

49 
 

how best to communicate with them. For example, credit institutions should ask 
themselves: 

•   Do consumers in vulnerable circumstances use the branch? 

•   Do people with visual impairment use the branch; do young people use the 
branch? 

•   Is there a portion of the community that speak languages other than English as 
their first language?  

3.10.8  
The notice of the fact that the assessment has been carried out must be published 
on the credit institution’s website no later than 2 months prior to the closure of the 
branch. Given the nature of the assessment, the published assessment does not 
need to contain any commercially sensitive information.   

3.10.9  
Within nine months of the closure of the branch, a second assessment must be 
commenced  by the credit institution. This must assess the impact of the closure on 
their customers, and where alternative arrangements were made for those 
customers, their experience of and satisfaction with the alternative arrangements. 
The assessment must be completed within 15 months of the branch closure. If 
there are material issues identified with the suitability of alternative arrangements 
that have been put in place, credit institutions must resolve these issues. 

3.10.10   The credit institution must publish the assessment referred to in 3.10.9 on its 
website and in a local newspaper and indicate where individuals can access a copy 
of the assessment.  

3.10.11   These requirements do not apply where the closure, merger, or move is temporary, 
for example where a branch may be closed for a period of time due to renovation, 
refurbishment or to allow for emergency works to be carried out. 

Conditions for unsolicited personal visits to personal consumers in relation to non-
mortgage arrears 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulations 278   &   279  

3.10.12   While unsolicited personal visits may be difficult for some borrowers, we believe 
that once in any 6-month period, a lender should be able to make an unsolicited 
personal visit to the home of a borrower in arrears to discuss the arrears, where 
other attempts at contact have failed. However, it is important that any such visits 
have the best interests of the borrower as their objective, and are conducted in an 
appropriate manner, in line with the requirements of the Code.  

3.10.13   For the Consumer Hire and Hire Purchase sectors,   Regulation 278   does not apply 

on the basis that those firms may need to access their asset more frequently given 

[Page 50]
 

50 
 

that ownership of the asset only passes from the firm to the customer at the end of 
the contract. The owner should retain the ability to inspect their asset and is 
subject to existing protections provided under the Consumer Credit Act in relation 
to consumer-hire and hire-purchase agreements, which limit firms’ ability to make 
personal visits and phone calls (restricting times, location and contacts).  

3.10.14   In respect of non-mortgage arrears, no more than three unsolicited telephone calls, 
per calendar month, to a personal consumer is permitted. This limit does not 
include communications made in compliance with other requirements of the Code 
or other regulatory requirements.  

3.10.15   The limit on unsolicited telephone calls applies per personal consumer. Therefore, 
where a personal consumer has, for example, a credit card and a personal loan in 
arrears with a lender, that lender may initiate no more than three unsolicited 
telephone calls per calendar month, by whatever means, to that personal 
consumer in respect of those arrears.  

3.10.16   It should be noted that specific requirements exist in relation to   Part 3 – Chapter 9  

of the Consumer Protection Regulations, which deals with arrears on a mortgage 
secured on the consumers’ primary residence.  

3.11.   Specific Guidance for the Insurance Sector  

The following guidance is relevant for insurance undertakings and insurance intermediaries.  

Explicit opt-in requirement for gadget, travel, dental and pet insurance  
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 327  

3.11.1  
This requirement requires that an insurance undertaking or insurance 
intermediary obtain the consumer’s consent to automatic renewal of a policy of 
pet insurance, travel insurance, gadget insurance, or dental insurance.  

3.11.2  
The requirement does not prevent automatic renewal for these insurance 
products; it simply applies an additional step to ensure consumers are fully aware 
of any proposed automatic renewal arrangement and proactively opt-in.  

 
3.11.3  
The requirement applies to new contracts entered into after the Consumer 
Protection Regulations come into effect and to the renewal of these contracts.  

 
Advance notification of expiry date of a policy of non-life insurance 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 346  

3.11.4  
The purpose of this requirement is to create “implementation intentions” to 
support consumers in overcoming behavioural biases, including procrastination 
that can deter optimal financial engagement. The intention is that, through the 

[Page 51]
 

51 
 

receipt of the pre-renewal notification, the consumer will be prompted to plan 
ahead and prepare to switch before they receive their renewal notification with 
the proposed premium and policy information.  

3.11.5  
The pre-renewal notification can be provided in a format as determined by the 
insurance undertaking or insurance intermediary, in line with the existing 
communication preferences of the consumer. It could be communicated to the 
policyholder via email, through an app or by post.  

3.11.6  
It is important to inform consumers of the purpose of the pre-renewal notification 
and to guide customers to take the intended action. The box below provides 
sample wording that could be used, however it is for the individual undertakings to 
determine the most appropriate wording to utilise in this notification.  

Box 5: Potential pre renewal notification wording 

  Notification via email or post  

 

Policy number: ABC123446789 
 
Dear Policyholder  
 
Your motor insurance policy will be coming up for renewal on [date].  We will 
send you full details including a quote for renewal of your product 20 working 
days prior to the renewal date.  
 
Now is a good time to consider if your motor insurance policy still meets your 
needs and provides you with the cover you require and whether there are any 
alternative products available that meet your needs.  
 
If you want to consider alternative products you should set aside time to 
consider your needs and to compare products. You will be able to undertake 
price comparisons once you receive your renewal notice. 
 
Full details will be set out in your renewal pack, which we will provide to you 
20 working days before the policy renewal date.  
 

 

Notification of lapse of cover of a health insurance policy 
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 347    

3.11.7  
The purpose of this requirement is to address the risk that an adult covered under 
a health insurance policy, who is not the policyholder, may not be notified or 

[Page 52]
 

52 
 

otherwise aware of a cancellation or lapse of the policy. This scenario could 
present considerable risks for the consumer, as they may not be aware that the 
health insurance cover has ceased.  

3.11.8  
This is not a retrospective requirement and we do not require insurance 
undertakings to collect contact details from adults who are not the policyholder 
but covered under existing health insurance policies. However, as health insurance 
policies are annual policies, over time, the assumption is that this information will 
be collected for all adults.  

3.11.9  
The health insurance undertaking should make reasonable efforts to collect the 
contact details of the adults covered under the health insurance policy. Ultimately 
the policyholder is responsible for the provision of contact details; phone, email or 
postal address of all adults covered under the health insurance policy. If the 
policyholder fails to provide that information, then the health insurance 
undertaking cannot notify the adult covered under the health insurance policy in 
the event that the cover has ceased.   

3.11.10   It is for individual health insurance undertakings to determine and put in place 
mechanisms to collect the contact details of all adults covered under the health 
insurance policy, this could be through including additional fields on online 
platforms or through their app.  

3.11.11   The requirement does not apply where a health insurance policy under a corporate 
health insurance scheme is arranged by an employer with an insurance 
undertaking for a group of employees.  

Timing of Premium Rebates  
Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulations 60 ,  348   &   351  

3.11.12   An insurance undertaking must provide a consumer any premium rebate that is 
due from the insurance undertaking within 10 working days of the rebate 
becoming due, whether paid directly to the consumer or via an intermediary. 

3.11.13   For the avoidance of doubt, an insurance undertaking may specify in its policy 
terms and conditions a condition that rebates under a certain specified amount will 
not be refunded to the consumer, and/or additional premiums under a certain 
specified amount will not be sought from the consumer. However, insurance 
undertakings are also reminded of their obligations under   Regulation 60  to provide 
the terms and conditions attaching to a product or service before the consumer 
enters into a contract for that product or service. 

Consumer Protection Regulations –   Regulation 351  

[Page 53]
 

53 
 

3.11.14   Regarding compliance on rebates, this Regulation, stipulates that an insurance 
intermediary must obtain the prior written agreement from the consumer every 
time it intends to deduct any charges from a premium rebate. This requirement 
would not be satisfied by obtaining such agreement in the terms of business. 

 

 

[Page 54]
T : +353 (0)1 224 5800     
E : publications@centralbank.ie 
www.centralbank.ie 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
[Contains 1 images/figures]
