[Page 1]
 

   

 

 

 

 

March 2025  

Guidance on  
Protecting Consumers in  
Vulnerable Circumstances
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 2]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 2 
 

 

 

Guidance on Protecting Consumers  
in Vulnerable Circumstances 

Consumers in vulnerable circumstances require 

additional support when engaging with financial 

services. Firms need to understand vulnerability, 

and to ensure that their culture, policies and 

processes take account of the needs of consumers in 

vulnerable circumstances.  

 

Section 1 -  Introduction 

1.1.   Background 

1.1.1 
Consumers in vulnerable circumstances are more likely to suffer financial 
detriment or harm. They may make poor financial decisions and it is important, 
therefore, that firms consider the needs of consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances and provide additional supports as appropriate. The definition of 
consumers in vulnerable circumstances is explored further in section 2.1 of this 
Guidance. 

1.1.2  
The purpose of this Guidance is to set out the background to the definition and 
approach to vulnerability under the Consumer Protection Code 1  (the Code), and 
to describe the Central Bank’s expectations of firms in meeting their obligations 
under the Code.  

1.1.3 
This Guidance can support firms in adopting the right mind-set and culture to 
effectively support consumers in vulnerable circumstances. We are seeking to 
embed an understanding of vulnerability within the culture of a firm, and to 
ensure that the needs of consumers in vulnerable circumstances, and a 
commitment to addressing these needs, is an integral part of a firm’s customer 
focus. This will allow firms to be prepared and able to assist when they engage 
with consumers in vulnerable circumstances. 
 

 

                                                                 
1  S.I. 80 of 2025 The Central Bank Reform Act 2010 (Section 17A) (Standards for Business) Regulations 2025 (‘Standards for 
Business’) and S.I. 81 of 2025 Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 (Section 48) (Consumer Protection) 
Regulations 2025 (‘Consumer Protection Regulations’) together are called the Consumer Protection Code. 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 3]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 3 
 

 

 

1.2.   G20/OECD High–Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection  

1.2.1  
The   G20/OECD High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection 2  set out that 
firms have a responsibility to treat all financial customers ‘equitably, honestly and 
fairly at all stages of their relationship with financial services providers’, and to ensure 
that ‘special attention should be paid to the treatment of customers who may be 
experiencing vulnerability’. Under Principle 6, the OECD sets out that ‘approaches 
may take into account that consumer vulnerability can manifest differently in 
different circumstances and may be due to a combination of personal characteristics, 
economic situations and market conditions’.  

1.2.2  
The definition of ‘consumers in vulnerable circumstances’ in the Code reflects the 
OECD’s approach to vulnerability under the High-Level Principles.  

1.3.   Securing Customers’ Interests 

1.3.1  
The Code’s Standards for Business include a Standard that   requires firms to secure 
the interests of their customers. This Standard is elaborated by Supporting Standards 
for Business, and is further explained in Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests, 
exploring what this means in practice.  

1.3.2  
The overarching duty on firms to secure the interests of customers requires firms to 
secure the interests of all customers, 3  including consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances. Securing the interests of consumers in vulnerable circumstances 
requires firms to understand vulnerability, to anticipate that some consumers may be 
in vulnerable circumstances, and to ensure that the culture, strategy, business model, 
decision-making, systems, controls, policies, processes and procedures of firms take 
account of their reasonable needs.  

1.3.3  
The specific Code requirements 4  and Guidance on Protecting Consumers in 
Vulnerable Circumstances 5  complement and build on the Standard for Business and 
our Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests, recognising that consumers in 
vulnerable circumstances will require additional protection and support when 
engaging with financial services. 

                                                                 
2  Instruments, O.L., 2012. Recommendation of the Council on High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection. 
Available at   https://www.oecd.org/finance/hig h- l e vel-principles-on-financial-consumer-protection.htm.    
3  Customer in the context of ‘Securing Customer Interest’ means customers who are natural persons; groups of natural 
persons; an incorporated entity with a turnover of up to €5million, or groups of incorporated entities with a combined turnover 
of up to €5million. 
4  The Code requirements on protecting consumers in vulnerable circumstances are set out in the Consumer Protection 
Regulations. 
5  ‘consumer in vulnerable circumstances’ means a consumer that is a natural person and whose personal circumstances, 
whether permanent or temporary, make that consumer especially susceptible to harm, particularly where a regulated entity is 
not acting with the appropriate levels of care, and ‘vulnerable circumstances’ shall be construed accordingly. (Consumer 
Protection Regulations, regulation 2(1)). 

[Page 4]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 4 
 

 

 

1.4.   MiFID and Crowdfunding Services 

1.4.1  
The Code does not directly apply to firms when providing MiFID services 6  or to 
crowdfunding services. 7  The Bank’s guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests, 
however, sets out that we expect firms providing MiFID services to consider and 
apply that guidance in the context of fulfilling their obligation to  “act honestly, fairly 
and professionally in accordance with the best interests of  [their]  clients ” in accordance 
with Regulation 31 of the MiFID Regulations. 8  For crowdfunding service providers, 
we also expect firms to consider and apply the Securing Customers’ Interests 
guidance in the context of fulfilling their obligations to “ act honestly, fairly and 
professionally in accordance with the best interests of  [their]  clients ” under Article 3 of 
the EU Crowdfunding Regulations. 9   

1.4.2  
Similarly, the guidance, direction and learning for firms set out in this Guidance on 
Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances should also be considered by 
firms when providing MiFID services and crowdfunding services, where it explains 
how firms can act in the best interests of consumers in vulnerable circumstances. It 
should be noted, however, that the Central Bank does not expect crowdfunding 
service providers, or firms providing MiFID services to comply with Trusted Contact 
Persons requirements and training requirements. 

1.5.   Reasonableness, Proportionality and Appropriate Levels of Care 

1.5.1  
The Code’s vulnerability requirements are grounded in proportionality, and an 
expectation that firms will take reasonable steps to provide consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances with appropriate levels of care. The requirements and guidance apply 
when firms are doing business with consumers who are natural persons.   

1.5.2  
As there are different degrees of vulnerability, the steps firms need to take in specific 
circumstances will take different forms. A firm’s approach to vulnerability also needs 
to reflect the nature and complexity of the products or services that are being offered 
to consumers.  

1.5.3  
Considering the broad understanding of what circumstances make consumers 
vulnerable, firms are not expected to be able to identify all consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances, nor to categorise or label consumers as such. What firms are expected 
to do is to understand and take account of the drivers of vulnerability that are 
relevant to the business of the firm, and to design their systems, processes and 
procedures so that consumers in vulnerable circumstances are reasonably protected 

                                                                 
6  Services regulated by the Bank under the Markets in Financial Instruments framework. 
7  The Code does not apply to crowdfunding services, with the exception of a number of requirements relating to advertising.  
8  S.I. No. 375/2017 - European Union (Markets in Financial Instruments) Regulations 2017. 
9   Regulation (EU) 2020/1503 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 October 2020 on European crowdfunding  
service providers for business, and amending Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 and Directive (EU) 2019/1937 .  

[Page 5]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 5 
 

 

 

from poor outcomes when the firm is otherwise acting properly. These systems, 
processes and procedures should include the reasonably expected due diligence that 
firms would undertake when on-boarding any customer; and training staff to identify 
and understand those circumstances relevant to the business of the firm that may 
make customers vulnerable. 

1.5.4  
Our expectation is that firms will arrange their business and train their staff so that 
when consumers in vulnerable circumstances are identified, the firm is in a position to 
take reasonable steps to support those consumers.  

1.5.5  
By understanding vulnerability, meeting the requirements of the Code, and reflecting 
a customer-focus across its business, a firm will improve the outcomes for consumers 
in vulnerable circumstances overall, and thereby meet the standard required by the 
Code. 

1.6.   Structure of Guidance 

1.6.1  
The Guidance set out in Section 2 outlines what the definition of consumers in 
vulnerable circumstances means, how firms should approach this definition, and how 
firms should implement specific Code requirements relating to consumers in 
vulnerable circumstances. These requirements include: 

o   Providing assistance in individual circumstances; 
o   Providing appropriate training to staff so that they can identify and respond 
to consumers in vulnerable circumstances;  
o   Reporting concerns on financial abuse; and  
o   Facilitating the nomination of a Trusted Contact Person.  

1.6.2  
Section 3 of the Guidance examines how the approach to consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances aligns with other relevant domestic and EU requirements. 

1.6.3  
Throughout this guidance document we use the terms ‘consumer’ as in ’consumer 
protection’, and ‘customer’ as in ‘securing customers’ interests’. These terms are used 
interchangeably, and the use of one or other of the terms reflects the relationship 
that a person, as a consumer, has with a financial services firm. ‘Consumer’ is 
narrower than ‘customer’ and is defined in the Code as those customers who are 
either a natural person; a group of natural persons; an incorporated body with a 
turnover of up to €5 million, or a group of incorporated entities with a combined 
turnover of up to €5 million. 
 

[Page 6]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 6 
 

 

 

Section 2 - Guidance 

2.1.  
Defining Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 

2.1.1  
What do we mean by consumers in vulnerable circumstances? When we consider 
our consumer protection objective, we have regard to the principle that 
consumers should take responsibility for their choices and decisions. However, 
we know that there are very real factors that might limit their ability to do so.  
 
2.1.2  
Circumstances and characteristics of vulnerability may result in consumers having 
additional or different needs, and may limit their ability or willingness to make 
decisions and choices or to represent their own interests. These consumers may be at 
greater risk of financial harm, particularly if things go wrong or financial products are 
unsuitable. Such a scenario was highlighted in a High Court case relating to the 
provision of inappropriate investment advice to a client. The failure by the firm to get 
to know the client properly and the provision of inappropriate advice resulted in the 
client experiencing significant financial loss where their circumstances meant that they 
required a steady return over time. 10  
 
2.1.3  
Vulnerability is not always a static, innate or permanent characteristic of a person. It 
includes any condition, characteristic or circumstance that makes a person more likely 
to suffer poor outcomes, particularly if firms do not act with the appropriate degree of 
care. These conditions can arise because of health issues, life events or lack of 
capability. Any circumstance that makes a consumer more prone to experiencing worse 
outcomes makes that person vulnerable. Moreover, individuals can move in and out of 

vulnerable circumstances (e.g. because of a bereavement, a job loss or ill health).  
 
2.1.4  
As noted, firms are required to secure the interests of all customers. However, some 
customers will require additional support when engaging with financial services. These 
will include those experiencing long-term vulnerability resulting from an inherent 
characteristic or those experiencing temporary vulnerability resulting from a specific 
trigger, such as a bereavement.  
 
2.1.5  
The approach to consumers in vulnerable circumstances should not be to label 
some customers as vulnerable, and therefore, by extension others as not 
vulnerable. While there are clearly persons who have innate and permanent 
qualities that will mean that they need additional assistance, only focusing on 

                                                                 
10   James Haughey v J&E trading as Davy, Bank of Ireland Mortgage Bank and Bank of Ireland  [2014] IEHC 206. Available at 
https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/cff883ea-d2dc-4708-9731-b08d5e0c4bf4/2014_IEHC_206_1.pdf/pdf#view=fitH .   

[Page 7]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 7 
 

 

 

these customers does not take adequate account of all of those customers whose 
challenges across a broader risk spectrum need to be considered.  
 
2.1.6  
The definition of consumer in vulnerable circumstances in the Code reflects this 
broader concept and approach to vulnerability: 
 

‘consumer in vulnerable circumstances’ means a consumer that is a 

natural person and whose personal circumstances, whether permanent or 

temporary, make that consumer especially susceptible to harm, 

particularly where a regulated entity is not acting with the appropriate 

levels of care, and ‘vulnerable circumstances’ shall be construed 

accordingly. 

 
2.1.7  
In this definition, the use of the word ‘harm’ should be understood in the context 
of the relationship between a firm and consumers. Financial services firms exist to 
provide services and products to their customers. So the question firms must ask 
themselves is what types of harm their customers may be vulnerable to, and how 
this might impact their customer experience and outcomes.  
 
2.1.8  
‘Harm’ can be understood to mean the less favourable outcomes that may arise 
where a firm fails to act with the appropriate levels of care towards consumers in 
vulnerable circumstances, e.g. in the design of their business, delivery of their 
products and services, and other interactions with the consumer. For example, a 
consumer may transact for products or services that are unsuitable for their 
needs as a result of poor product design, ineffective communication or the use of 
inappropriate delivery channels.  

2.2.  
Implementing a Broader Concept of Consumers in Vulnerable 
Circumstances 

2.2.1  
The following sections outline what is reasonably expected of firms in order to 
properly secure the interests of consumers in vulnerable circumstances. 
 

Governance and Culture 

2.2.2  
A firm’s directors and senior management should ensure that securing the fair 
treatment of consumers in vulnerable circumstances is embedded as part of a 
consumer-focused culture throughout the firm’s operations and processes, not 
just in customer facing areas of the firm but also in areas such as product and 
service design.  

[Page 8]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 8 
 

 

 

 
2.2.3  
Staff, from senior management through to frontline and relevant back-office staff, 
can influence outcomes for consumers in vulnerable circumstances. Firms need to 
understand vulnerability, and the ways in which consumers in certain 
circumstances can be vulnerable.  

 

2.2.4  
Staff should be enabled and encouraged to identify how they can reduce the 
potential for harm to consumers in vulnerable circumstances. This requires firms 
to ensure staff are sufficiently aware of the drivers of vulnerability. Firms should 
ensure that all relevant staff have the appropriate skills and capabilities, as well as 
support from appropriate systems and processes, to understand and take into 
account the needs of consumers in vulnerable circumstances in their work (see 
section on training below). 

 

2.2.5  
Overall, firms should understand the types and characteristics of vulnerability 
that may exist in their target market and customer base, and the impact of these 
vulnerabilities on the financial needs of their customers, by identifying the types 
of risk to which their customers may be vulnerable. If firms do not understand the 
characteristics of vulnerability within their target market and customer base, and 
so fail to ensure products and services take account of these needs, those 
customers are at increased risk of experiencing poor or inconsistent outcomes.  

 

2.2.6  
Consideration of vulnerability should influence the design of a firm’s products, 
policies and processes and should be reflected in all aspects of the customer 
journey. Firms should anticipate that a proportion of consumers in their target 
market/customer base are likely to be vulnerable and to build this into product 
design, and into their policies and procedures for delivering financial services.  

 

Process and Product Design 

2.2.7  
Firms should seek to proactively address potential consumer vulnerability in their 
general process and product design. They need to design their products and 
processes so that specific predictable vulnerabilities do not adversely impact on 
some customers, resulting in less favourable outcomes.  
 
2.2.8  
Distributing products via a digital platform requires consideration of the potential 
differences in consumers’ understanding and capability to use such digital 
platforms. This consideration will inform general product and process design 
choices, and the provision of supports for consumers, which can remove barriers 

[Page 9]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 9 
 

 

 

to access. Product and process design can also seek to positively protect 
customers in vulnerable circumstances. Design features that have been 
developed to protect and support customers in vulnerable circumstances include: 

 

o  
Use of technology by firms to identify hesitation by customers, indicating 
uncertainty or lack of familiarity, and to automatically ask if they need 
assistance. 
 
o  
The introduction of a block or limitation on payments to new payees (as a 
brake on potential frauds), or the facility for customers themselves to opt-in 
for blocks on payments related to gambling. 
 
o  
Use of technology and design choices to identify and limit the operation of 
money mules. The design of processes for on-boarding of customers and 
surveillance of usage, can alert firms to those customers who may have been 
recruited, often unknowingly, to participate in illegal activities including 
money transfers.  

 

2.2.9  
Proper product and process design should also involve testing and review, to 
ensure processes and products meet customer needs and that appropriate 
supports are in place.  

 

Complaints Handling 

2.2.10   A specific part of the business where firms must pay special attention to the needs 
of some consumers in vulnerable circumstances is in the area of complaints 
handling. The G20/OECD High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer 
Protection specify that ‘the needs of consumers, including those experiencing 
vulnerability, should be considered when designing and publicising complaints 
handling and redress mechanisms.’ 11  
 
2.2.11   Firms should ensure that complaints mechanisms and procedures take account of 
the fact that consumers in vulnerable circumstances may be particularly deterred 
by complex or difficult processes or procedures for complaining to the firm. All 
customers may be susceptible to abandoning a complaint as a result of a process 
that is not well designed and that makes the pursuit of a complaint time-
consuming, difficult or unduly complex. 

                                                                 
11  Instruments, O.L., 2012. Recommendation of the Council on High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection. 
Available at   https://legalinstruments.oecd.org /e n /in struments/OECD-LEGAL-0394.  

[Page 10]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 10 
 

 

 

2.3.  
Implementing Specific Requirements  

Assistance to Individual Customers 

2.3.1  
The requirements of the Code 12  oblige firms, where they identify that a customer 
is a consumer in vulnerable circumstances, to provide that customer with 
reasonable assistance in order to facilitate the customer in their dealings with the 
firm. Under the definition of ‘consumer in vulnerable circumstances’ in the Code, 
this extends beyond customers that are considered innately vulnerable, and 
captures circumstances of vulnerability across a broader spectrum of risk.  
 
2.3.2  
Importantly, this approach does not require individual customers to be 
considered as ‘vulnerable’ for firms to provide support, in line with the broader 
requirements of the Code, including the requirement to secure customers’ 
interests. For example, if a customer states that they do not understand 
something, or they need assistance, then a firm should take appropriate steps to 
support that customer’s understanding, regardless of whether an assessment of 
that customer would reveal circumstances to suggest that they may be in 
vulnerable circumstances.  
 
2.3.3  
We have seen examples where firms have provided assistance to customers to 
address vulnerabilities associated with specific situations. In some cases, this 
assistance has been provided by individual firms, and in other cases by firms 
working in conjunction with industry bodies and consumer representative bodies 
to ensure the appropriate supports are made available to consumers.  
 

•   For consumers dealing with financial hardship, the Banking and Payments 
Federation Ireland (BPFI) and Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) 
protocol is an agreement between the BPFI and MABS which outlines how 
borrowers in financial hardship are to be treated, and provides a framework 
for BPFI members and MABS clients to communicate with each other about 
debts. 

 
•   The Irish Banking Culture Board has developed a Common Commitment of 
Care for Bereaved Customers, 13  which provides details of dedicated resources 
available from banks for their customers. Some firms operate specialist units to 

                                                                 
12  Where a regulated entity has identified that a consumer that is a natural person is in vulnerable circumstances, the regulated 
entity shall provide that consumer with such ongoing reasonable assistance as may be necessary to facilitate that consumer in 
their dealings with the regulated entity. Consumer Protection Regulations, Regulation 34. 
13  Irish Banking Culture Board (2022).  Common Commitment of Care for Bereaved Customers  [online] Available at: 
https://www.irishbankingcultureboard.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Common-Commitment-of-Care-tagged.pdf.  

[Page 11]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 11 
 

 

 

assist bereaved consumers, recognising that managing financial affairs after a 
death may be challenging. 
 

•   For consumers who may have suffered financial loss and find themselves in 
financial hardship, some insurance companies will provide interim payments to 
the customer during the claims process.  
 
Training 

2.3.4  
Under the Code, 14  a firm must provide staff with appropriate training to allow 
them to recognise and support consumers in vulnerable circumstances. Staff, 
from senior management through to frontline and relevant back-office staff, can 
influence outcomes for consumers in vulnerable circumstances. Firms should 
ensure that all relevant staff have the appropriate skills and capabilities, 
supported by systems and processes, to understand and take into account the 
needs of consumers in vulnerable circumstances in their roles. 
 
2.3.5  
Staff of firms need to be able to recognise and respond to vulnerability. They need 
to know when it is appropriate to seek additional support within the firm for 
customers, depending on their circumstances. They should be empowered to seek 
that support while respecting the privacy and autonomy of individuals, to ensure 
future engagement with the customer takes account of their particular 
circumstances.  
 
2.3.6  
Training should apply to all relevant staff 15  and should not be limited to those 
involved in customer-facing roles. The requirement applies to staff employed in 

product development, product testing, marketing, advertising, and any other 
positions that influence the customer journey. Training should also extend to 
those responsible for supervising and managing staff in such roles. 
 
2.3.7  
The training obligation is intended to apply proportionately. It is not intended that 
formal external training need be procured at a cost to the firm, although larger 
firms may opt for such solutions. Smaller firms may utilise materials available 
from organisations that represent various vulnerable sectors or that might be 
available from professional or representative bodies. It is for the firm itself to 

                                                                 
14  Consumer Protection Regulations, Regulation 35. 
15  The persons referred to in Regulation 35 are persons performing the following functions on behalf of the regulated entity: 
(a) consumer-facing functions in respect of consumers that are natural persons;  
(b) functions concerned in the design and development of financial services for consumers that are natural persons; 
(c) functions concerned in the sale or marketing of financial services to consumers that are natural persons;  
(d) functions involving the oversight of and responsibility for the roles referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c);  
(e) any other function that may have cause to deal with consumers in vulnerable circumstances at any time. 
Consumer Protection Regulations, Regulation 35. 

[Page 12]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 12 
 

 

 

identify what staff training solutions are appropriate considering its customer 
base, business model and the number and experience of its staff. 
 
2.3.8  
The table below sets out what should be covered by staff training. Training on 
vulnerability need not be limited to the areas listed - certain sector specific areas 
may require more tailored and focused topics. However, any proposed training 
programme should include these key aspects at a minimum. 

 

Figure 1 - Training for staff on recognising and supporting customers in vulnerable circumstances – Source: 

Central Bank of Ireland 

 

Reporting of Concerns by Staff 

2.3.9  
Financial abuse, including frauds and scams, remains a perennial concern, in 
particular for consumers in vulnerable circumstances. Financial services firms 
cannot prevent all forms of frauds and scams and abuse from occurring. However, 
firms are often in the frontline of fraudulent or abusive transactions or addressing 
the consequences of the actions that customers are defrauded into taking.  

[IMAGE BLOCK]

Training for Staff on Vulnerability  

[IMAGE BLOCK]

•
Types of vulnerabilities 
•
Key signs and indicators of vulnerability 
•
How to recognise a consumer in vulnerable circumstances 
•
Understanding how vulnerabilities impact customer behaviour and outcomes 
and why flexible and adaptable systems matter 
•
Enabling and empowering customers to disclose a need 
•
Practical assistance and supports available for customers 
•
Digital journeys - what alternative options are available and what supports 
can be provided for customers to utilise digital options?  
•
Recognising and responding to exploitation and abuse and the procedure to 
be followed if there are concerns about a customer 
•
The role of the Trusted Contact Person and the procedure to be followed to 
establish this arrangement 
•
Compliance with obligations under the ADMA and GDPR 
•
Adult safeguarding 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 3 images/figures]


[Page 13]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 13 
 

 

 

 
2.3.10  
The Code includes a requirement on firms to have clear procedures for their 
employees to report concerns that a customer, who is a personal consumer, is the 
victim, or is at risk of being the victim, of a fraud or scam or other financial 
abuse. 16   
 
2.3.11  
When there are issues of concern with customers, frontline staff should be able to 
bring their concerns to the attention of those within the firm who are sufficiently 
expert and senior, and authorised to take whatever actions can be taken by the 
firm to seek to limit or prevent detriment or harm to the customer.  

 
2.3.12  
Firms should have a dedicated person(s) to whom concerns can be raised in a 
confidential manner and an appropriate policy and procedure setting out how 
staff can raise concerns. As noted above, firms should provide training to staff to 
help them identify and respond appropriately to such circumstances if they arise.  
 

Appropriate Treatment of Customers in Vulnerable Circumstances – Recording of 
Information 

2.3.13  
Consumers  in vulnerable circumstances will not always be willing or able, without 
discomfort or difficulty, to communicate those circumstances to a firm. It is 
important that they are assisted in doing so, and that they do not have to 
unnecessarily explain their circumstances on multiple occasions. Staff should 
record relevant information on vulnerability in an appropriate way that is 
accessible by other staff who may need it in the context of the ongoing customer 
relationship.      
 
2.3.14  
In order to ensure that they support consumers in vulnerable circumstances, 
firms should have processes and systems in place to appropriately record 
relevant information. In determining whether recording of information is 
‘appropriate’ firms must ensure that they are compliant with applicable data 
protection laws 17 . Processes and systems should reflect appropriate levels of 
consent (taking account of individual circumstances) and ensure that information 
is up to date, not prejudicial and retained only for appropriate purposes and 
periods.  
 

                                                                 
16  Please also see Regulation 4(1)(f), and Regulation 10 of the Standards for Business which set out the Code’s general 
obligations on firms in relation to financial abuse. 
17  Data Protection Commission (2019).  Data Protection Legislation  [online] Available at   https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/who-
we-are/data-protection-legislation .  

[Page 14]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 14 
 

 

 

2.3.15  
Firms should consider how best to facilitate customers in easily updating their 
information - e.g. consider establishing a facility that allows customers to notify 
the firm of their circumstances, or a change in circumstances, confidentially. All 
customers could use this facility to inform firms of their circumstances as the 
customers see fit. Such a facility might help customers in vulnerable 
circumstances to avoid difficult conversations that might otherwise prevent them 
from communicating to the firm at all.  
 
2.3.16  
There may also be circumstances where the customer is not willing or able to 
provide information about their circumstances and where it will not be possible 
or practicable to obtain consent to retain this information. In such scenarios, it 
may still be appropriate to record relevant information where it is clear that it will 
assist the firm in securing the customer’s interests. 
 

Trusted Contact Person 

2.3.17  
The revised Code includes a requirement 18  for firms to facilitate customers, who 
are personal consumers and who wish to do so, to provide the name and contact 
information of a trusted contact. Any person so nominated is someone with whom 
a firm may communicate where there may be difficulty in dealing with the 
customer, or where financial abuse, including fraud, is suspected. This 
requirement does not require that a customer be identified or categorised in 
advance by a firm as a consumer in vulnerable circumstances. Any customer who 
is a personal consumer may choose to nominate a Trusted Contact Person. 
 
2.3.18  
Staff of a firm should be familiar with the opportunity for customers to nominate 
a Trusted Contact Person. When dealing with customers, staff can advise 
customers, where they believe that this is appropriate, that the customer can 
nominate a Trusted Contact Person. 
 
2.3.19  
Prior to the arrangement being put in place, firms should explain clearly to 
customers and to the proposed ‘trusted contact’ what the role of a Trusted 
Contact Person is and the circumstances under which they may be contacted 
under the arrangement. 
 
2.3.20  
A Trusted Contact Person is not a legal representative of the consumer. The 
appointment of a Trusted Contact Person allows a firm, at the firm’s discretion, to 
contact the Trusted Contact Person for the purposes of communicating with, or 
receiving information about, the consumer.  

                                                                 
18  Consumer Protection Regulations, Regulation 36. 

[Page 15]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 15 
 

 

 

 
2.3.21  
The Firm is not compelled to provide information to the Trusted Contact Person, 
nor does the Trusted Contact Person have any rights to make decisions on behalf 
of the consumer. A firm should not unnecessarily communicate confidential 
information about the affairs of the consumer to the Trusted Contact Person.  
 
2.3.22  
Under the Code, a firm may contact a Trusted Contact persons in circumstances 
where: 
 

(a)  
the firm has a concern about possible financial abuse of the customer, or 
(b) 
the firms needs to confirm the specifics of – 
(i)  
the customer’s current contact information, 
(ii) 
the customer’s health status, or 
(iii) 
the identity of any appointed legal guardian, executor or trustee of the 
customer, or 
(c)  
the firms experiences difficulties in communicating with the consumer. 
 
2.3.23  
The Code does not impose any obligation on firms to contact a Trusted Contact 
Person. However, firms should consider that liaising with the Trusted Contact 
Person is a good way of firms supporting their customers. 
 
2.3.24  
A customer of a firm may also have other arrangements in place to assist them in 
their dealings with financial services firms. For example, a customer may have in 
place a decision making assistance arrangement under the Assisted Decision-
Making (Capacity) Act, 2015. Where such other statutory arrangements are in 
place, firms should defer to these arrangements instead of communicating with a 
Trusted Contact Person.  
 
2.3.25  
The nomination of a Trusted Contact Person is a choice lying solely with the 
customer. Insofar as that choice is properly communicated to a firm, the firm is 
not under any obligation to second-guess or review the nomination. In 
circumstances where a firm is concerned that there is an abusive or coercive 
relationship between the customer and the nominated Trusted Contact Person, 
the firm should consider what steps they might be able to take to assist the 
customer. These considerations should be made regardless of the desire of the 
consumer to nominate a Trusted Contact Person.  
 

[Page 16]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 16 
 

 

 

Section 3 -  Broader Domestic and EU frameworks  

The Code requirements and this Guidance are aligned to the wider EU consumer 
protection framework and other domestic protections for consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances. We highlight below two developments in the broader EU and domestic 
consumer protection framework and consider their interaction with the Code. 

3.1.  
Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 

Right of Consumers to Make their Own Decisions 

3.1.1  
The Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 (ADMA) came into effect on 
26 April 2023. This legislation provides a framework to support decision-making 
to maximise a relevant person's capacity in order to help uphold their rights and 
safeguard their autonomy 19 . It introduced three types of support arrangements 
for people who currently, or may shortly, face challenges when making certain 
decisions. It also provides for people who wish to plan ahead for a time in the 
future when they might lose capacity, by way of an advance healthcare directive, 
or enduring power of attorney. 
 
3.1.2  
It is important to distinguish between lack of capacity and situations where there 
may be no concerns about a customer’s decision-making capacity but whose 
circumstances may raise concerns about vulnerability.  
 
3.1.3  
Where firms are concerned about the decision-making capacity of an individual, 
the provisions of the ADMA must be complied with. Firms must consider the 
supporting Codes of Practice issued by the Decision Support Service, 20  including 
the Code of Practice for Financial Service Providers. 21  
 
3.1.4  
The requirements and guidance under the Code relating to consumers in 
vulnerable circumstances are consistent with, and complement, the requirements 
under the ADMA. Under both the ADMA and the Code, staff of financial services 
firms must be able to assist consumers in vulnerable circumstances, with the 
ADMA focusing on vulnerability linked to decision-making capacity. The 
provisions of the Code respect an individual’s decision-making discretion and 
autonomy while seeking to ensure that consumers in vulnerable circumstances 

                                                                 
19  Decision Support Service (2023).  Code of Practice for Supporting Decision-Making and Assessing Capacity  [online] Available at 
https://decisionsupportservice.ie/sites/default/files/2023-03/1.%20COP_on_supporting_decision-
making_and_assessing_capacity_0.pdf    
20  Decision Support Service.  About Us  [online] Available at   https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie/about-us.  
21  Decision Support Service (2023).  Code of Practice for Financial Service Providers  [online] Available at 
https://decisionsupportservice.ie/sites/default/files/2023-04/11.%20COP_for_financial_service_providers.pdf.  

[Page 17]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 17 
 

 

 

are appropriately assisted and supported by firms. Where a customer may require 
assistance to make a decision, firms will need to comply with the provisions of the 
ADMA and the Code. 
 
3.1.5  
The obligation under the Code to secure the interests of consumers in vulnerable 
circumstances requires firms to consider what reasonable steps might be taken to 
ensure that those customers receive a full and proper service from the firm. This 
includes customers who may be experiencing vulnerability due to diminished 
capacity and customers who are experiencing vulnerability for other reasons. For 
example, a customer who speaks another language and who does not have full 
command of English is not someone who lacks capacity. The customer is, 
however, vulnerable to making decisions that they do not understand or on which 
they might be insufficiently informed. Firms should take reasonable steps in these 
circumstances to assist such customers, recognising that customers in such 
circumstances must also take responsibility for their own actions and decisions.  
 

3.2.   European Accessibility Act 

3.2.1  
The European Accessibility Act, implemented in Ireland by the European Union 
(Accessibility Requirements of Products and Services) Regulations 2023 (S.I. No. 
636 of 2023) will come into effect in June 2025. This Act introduces new 
requirements around accessibility of products and services, including financial 
products and services, in the EU. 
 
3.2.2  
The European Accessibility Act aims to improve standards across all sectors, 
aligning with the expectations of the Code for financial services firms. Persons 
with disabilities should not be regarded as inherently vulnerable. It is often the 
disabling barriers in society, rather than the individual’s impairment that create 
the vulnerability for that person. So, for example, the way in which information is 
provided can make persons with a disability who are otherwise wholly competent 
and capable of conducting their own affairs, vulnerable to not having, or being 
able to access, the full information needed to inform their choices; or the 
necessary technology to be able to conduct financial services might not be 
designed to take into account the needs of persons with disabilities. 
 
3.2.3  
The requirement of the Code to secure customers’ interests requires financial 
services firms to take reasonable steps to ensure that their processes and 

[Page 18]
   

 
Guidance on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 18 
 

 

 

services are appropriately designed so as not to disadvantage persons with a 
disability when interacting with the firm. 22   

 
3.3.   Data Protection 

3.3.1  
When seeking to comply with their obligations in respect of consumers in 
vulnerable circumstances, firms should ensure that the processes and procedures 
that are adopted comply with data protections laws. 

3.3.2  
The Guidance Note of the Data Protection Commissioner on the Legal Bases for 
Processing Personal Data 23  should be considered by firms to see what steps 
might be possible in different scenarios. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

                                                                 
22  See also Standards for Business, Regulation 9(a). 
23  Data Protection Commission (2019).  Guidance Note: Legal Basis for Processions Personal Data  [online] Available at  
https://www.dataprotection.ie/sites/default/files/uploads/2020-04/Guidance%20on%20Legal%20Bases.pdf  

[Page 19]
T : +353 (0)1 224 5800     
E : publications@centralbank.ie 
www.centralbank.ie 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
[Contains 1 images/figures]
