[Page 1]
March 2025

Guidance on  
Securing Customers’ Interests
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 2]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 2 

Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 

Customers’ interests are best served through well-

functioning financial services markets providing 

appropriate levels of availability and choice from 

sustainably profitable, resilient, well-run, consumer 

focused firms who secure their customers’ interests. 

Section 1 – Introduction 

1.1.
Background 

1.1.1
Financial products and services provide many benefits to consumers, both in 
terms of being critical to their day-to-day lives and in safeguarding their 
financial future.   
1.1.2
Our vision is for a well-functioning financial system where sustainably 
profitable, resilient, well-run firms incorporate consumer interests into their 
culture, strategy, business model, decision-making and operations, offer 
consumers availability and choice, and empower them to make effective 
decisions to meet their financial needs. 
1.1.3
We have seen examples in the past of the significant customer detriment that 
can result from a firm’s failure to focus on its customers’ best interests, including 
for example, the treatment of tracker mortgage customers and the approach to 
differential pricing in the insurance market. We have also seen examples where 
firms taking a system-wide perspective and a customer-focused approach as 
they pursue commercial imperatives, has supported positive outcomes for 
customers, including the successful large migration of current accounts from 
exiting banks to other providers. We want firms to build on the learnings from 
both poor and positive behaviours to meet their customers’ best interests 
obligation. 
1.1.4 Firms exist in the first instance to pursue their commercial objectives but the 
conduct and culture of financial services providers should reflect firms’ best 
interests obligation and support appropriate customer outcomes. Trust and 
confidence that firms will act in their customers’ interests is essential to the 
effective functioning of the financial system. It is vital that customers’ interests 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 3]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 3 

are secured at all stages of their relationship with their financial services provider. 
This means that as a firm pursues its commercial interests, it does so in a manner 
that is cognisant of the interests of its customers.  
1.1.5 The Consumer Protection Code 1  (the Code) reflects the fundamental obligation 
for firms to act in the best interests of their customers 2  and seeks to clarify  how
firms should approach meeting this in practice, recognising the importance of 
proportionality and customer autonomy. This is reflected through  Securing 
Customers’ Interests  which is set out across a specific Securing Customers’ 
Interests Standard for Business, a range of Supporting Standards for Business and 
this guidance which is intended to assist  firms’ in understanding their obligations 
in meeting the ‘securing customers’ interests’ standard. Together these elements 
are designed to support firms in the effective implementation of all their 
consumer protection obligations. 
1.1.6 The Code’s Standards for Business set out standards relating to governance, 
resources and risk management, along with conduct standards, which build on 
and update the original General Principles of the Code. These conduct standards 
include a specific obligation on firms to secure their customers’ interests. They 
also set out Supporting Standards for Business which articulate some of the ways 
that a firm can secure customers’ interests, including by: 

(a) ensuring that its culture, strategy, business model, decision-making, 
systems, controls, policies, processes and procedures take into account its 
customers’ interests; 
(b) acting in accordance with the reasonable expectations of its customers; 
(c) taking into account the interests of its customers when designing products 
and services, and the methods of delivery; 
(d) ensuring that its products and services are not designed to unfairly exploit 
the behaviours, habits, preferences or biases of customers leading to 
customer detriment; 

1 S.I. No. 80 of 2025 Central Bank Reform Act 2010 (Section 17A) (Standards for Business) Regulations 2025 
(‘Standards for Business’) and S.I. No. 81 of 2025 Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 (Section 48) 
(Consumer Protection) Regulations 2025 (‘Consumer Protection Regulations’) together are called the Consumer 
Protection Code. 
2 See regulation 4(1)(d) of the Standards for Business 

[Page 4]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 4 

(e) resolving any complaints received from customers efficiently, fairly and in a 
timely manner; 

(f) resolving errors and mistakes affecting customers efficiently, fairly and in a 
timely manner, and disclosing errors or mistakes to customers affected in a 
timely manner; 
(g) ensuring errors and mistakes identified for one customer that may 
reasonably have affected other customers are resolved for all affected 
customers efficiently, fairly and in a timely manner; 
(h) clearly distinguishing for customers between the entity’s regulated 
activities and its unregulated activities including by taking all appropriate 
steps to mitigate the risk that a customer will understand an activity to be, 
or to carry the protections of, a regulated activity where this is not the case; 
and 
(i) delivering fair outcomes for customers. 
1.1.7
The Consumer Protection Regulations comprise cross-sectoral and sector-
specific requirements, which include protections for customers relating to, for 
example: digitalisation, informing effectively, vulnerability, advertising and 
complaints resolution. Securing customers’ interests will support firms in the 
effective implementation of all of these consumer protection obligations.  

1.2.
Purpose of Guidance 

1.2.1
This Guidance articulates the Central Bank of Ireland’s (the Central Bank) 
expectations of firms in meeting their obligations under the Standards for 
Business to secure customers’ interests.  
1.2.2
This Guidance is designed to assist firms by setting out what firms need to 
consider, the actions they need to take and the mindset they should have, 
towards their customers to effectively comply with their obligation to secure 
the interests of their customers. This will support firms to effectively implement 
all their consumer protection obligations. 
1.2.3
In order for firms to be able to secure customers’ interests, there must be a 
collective understanding of what securing customers’ interests means and the 
types of behaviour it requires, including how it should be incorporated into 

[Page 5]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 5 

commercial objectives and be reflected across a firm’s culture, strategy, 
business model, decision-making and operations.  

1.2.4
In this Guidance, we outline an approach that should be applied by firms 
dynamically to new and existing products, services and business models, as they 
continue to emerge and evolve in a changing and increasingly digital 
environment. We seek to explain the overarching Standard for Business and 
Supporting Standards for Business concerning securing customers’ interests, 
and describe actions and approaches to be taken by firms when meeting those 
Standards.  

1.3.
Assessing Compliance 

1.3.1
This Guidance and the Central Bank’s  Guide to Consumer Protection Risk 
Assessment (CPRA Guidance) 3 , which sets out the Central Bank’s expectations 
of firms’ consumer risk management frameworks, are complementary 
documents, which should be read together. They have been developed to 
support firms in implementing their consumer protection obligations. The CPRA 
describes the Central Bank’s expectations of regulated financial services firms in 
implementing or enhancing their frameworks for managing risks to consumers, 
which should support firms in assessing the effectiveness of their frameworks. 
While, as noted in the CPRA Guidance, firm-specific CPRAs will form a key part 
of our supervisory framework for credit institutions, non-bank lenders, 
insurance undertakings, investment firms, large retail intermediaries, payment 
institutions and e-money institutions, it reflects questions that all firms can ask 
themselves when assessing whether they are securing the interests of 
consumers. 

1.3.2
Guidance is also available on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable 
Circumstances. This recognises that while firms must secure the interests of all 
their customers, that consumers in vulnerable circumstances may require 
additional protection and support when engaging with financial services.
1.4 Scope 

1.4.1
The Standard for Business and Supporting Standards for Business addressing 
securing customers' interests apply to firms when doing business with 

3 https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/regulation/consumer-protection/170328-cpra-guide-28-march-

2017.pdf.

[Page 6]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 6 

individuals and small businesses, which reflects the heightened protection 
required for individuals and small businesses. In this Guidance, references to 
‘customer’  in the context of ‘Securing Customer Interest’ means a person that is 
a natural person; groups of natural persons; an incorporated entity with a 
turnover of up to €5 million, or a group of incorporated entities with a combined 
turnover of up to  €5 million. 4
1.4.2
When we refer to ‘customers’ in this guidance, this includes, where appropriate, 
potential customers. This is because the requirement to secure customers’ 
interests is an aspect of firms’ overall obligations towards consumers, which is a 
much wider group than the firms’ current cohort of customers. 
1.4.3
The Standards for Business do not directly apply to firms when providing 
MiFID services 5  or to crowdfunding services. 6  However, we expect firms 
providing MiFID services to consider and apply this guidance in the context 
of fulfilling their obligation to “act honestly, fairly and professionally in 
accordance with the best interests of [their] clients” in accordance with 
Regulation 31 of the MiFID Regulations. 7  Similarly for crowdfunding service 
providers, we expect firms to consider and apply the Securing Customers’ 
Interests guidance in the context of fulfilling their obligations to “act 
honestly, fairly and professionally in accordance with the best interests of 
[their] clients” under Article 3 of the EU Crowdfunding Regulations. 8

1.4.4
Similarly, firms providing MiFID services and crowdfunding services should also 
consider the guidance, direction and learning for firms set out in the Guidance 
on Protecting Consumers in Vulnerable Circumstances, where it explains how 
firms can act in the best interests of consumers in vulnerable circumstances. It 
should be noted, however, that the Central Bank does not expect crowdfunding 
service providers, or firms providing MiFID services to comply with the Trusted 
Contact Persons requirements and training requirements. 

4 A ‘consumer’ within the meaning of Regulation 3 of the Central Bank Reform Act 2010 (Section 17A) (Standards for 
Business) Regulations 2025 (S.I. 80 of 2025)
5 Services regulated by the Bank under the Markets in Financial Instruments framework.  
6  The Code does not apply to crowdfunding services, with the exception of a number of requirements relating to 
advertising.  
7  S.I. No. 375/2017 - European Union (Markets in Financial Instruments) Regulations 2017. 
8 Regulation (EU) 2020/1503 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 October 2020 on European
crowdfunding service providers for business, and amending Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 and Directive (EU) 2019/1937 .

[Page 7]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 7 

1.5
Proportionality 

1.5.1
Proportionality has been and continues to be at the heart of our regulatory 
approach. As is the case with financial regulation in general, consumer protection 
requirements should be proportionate in terms of achieving the outcome sought 
without being unduly burdensome or costly.  
1.5.2
All firms have the same responsibility to secure customers’ interests. A firm’s 
approach to adhering to their obligations should reflect the nature of its business 
and the products and services it provides, and the profile of its customer base. 
1.5.3
Firms should focus on the customer outcomes that may result from their actions, 
considering their ability to influence those outcomes. This will depend on what a 
firm can know, or can reasonably be expected to know, at a relevant time. This in 
turn will be driven by multiple factors including a firm’s role in the distribution 
chain, the nature of the product or service being offered and the profile of a firm’s 
customers. We explore delivering fair customer outcomes further in section 2.9 
of this guidance. 
1.5.4
Securing customers’ interests does not mean that individual customers will 
always achieve positive outcomes or will always be protected from poor 
outcomes. It does not impose an open-ended duty that goes beyond the scope of 
the firm’s role and its ability to determine or influence customer outcomes, or 
protect customers from all potential harms. For instance, firms are not expected 
to protect customers from risks inherent to a product, such as the counterparty 
risk associated with an investment product. As discussed below, firms must 
respect their customers’ autonomy. It is not the role of a firm to step in or 
override a customers’ decision, even where it believes this to be a bad decision.  
However, they should be satisfied they have complied with all their obligations, 
including relevant suitability requirements, and have confidence, to the extent 
they can taking account of the nature of the relationship (e.g. advisory vs 
execution only), that the customer understands and accepts the risks associated 
with their decision.  
1.6
Customer Autonomy 

1.6.1
A well-functioning market system relies on decision-making by individuals as 
participants. Recognising this, subject to all of the obligations that are placed on 
financial firms to secure their customers’ interests, customers still have the right 

[Page 8]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 8 

and responsibility to make their own decisions as to what products and services 
they wish to purchase and how they plan to secure their financial well-being. 
1.6.2
Securing customers’ interests does not mean that a financial services firm is 
‘acting on behalf of’ a customer, or in any way taking responsibility for making 
decisions that should be made by the customer themselves. It is important that 
firms give effect to a person’s will and preferences. This is reflected in the 
Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 (ADMA) which provides a 
framework to support decision-making to maximise a relevant person's capacity 
in order to help uphold their rights and safeguard their autonomy. 9
1.6.3
In securing customers’ interests, firms have a role to play in empowering 
customers to make well-informed decisions and to take responsibility for their 
actions and decisions. Customers often need support to understand products and 
services, and they should have confidence that firms will act in a way that helps, 
rather than hinders, their ability to make decisions in line with their needs and 
financial objectives. Customers should also be able to trust that firms will not seek 
to unfairly exploit them through their behaviours, habits, preferences or biases, to 
benefit the firm in a way that causes customer detriment. 
1.7 Structure of Guidance  

1.7.1
The Guidance set out in  Section 2  outlines what meeting the Standards of 
securing customers’ interests means in practice. It sets out what firms need to 
consider, the actions they need to take and the mindset that they should adopt 
in relation to their dealings with customers. 
1.7.2
The Guidance includes a number of case studies and examples to illustrate what 
this means in practical terms. As a set of illustrative, non-exhaustive case studies 
and examples, they are not intended to cover every scenario or situation that 
may arise for a sector or firm. While the examples may refer to a specific sector 
or product, the principles and learnings highlighted in these examples are 
potentially relevant for all sectors and firms. We expect all firms to take the 
principles and learnings highlighted in each of the examples, and consider how 
they apply to the culture, strategy, business model, decision-making and 
systems, controls, policies, processes and procedures of the firm. 

9 https://decisionsupportservice.ie/sites/default/files/2023-03/1.%20COP_on_supporting_decision-
making_and_assessing_capacity_0.pdf

[Page 9]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 9 

Section 2 – Guidance 

2.1
Aligning Culture, Strategy, Business Model, Decision-Making and 
Systems, Controls, Policies, Processes and Procedures with 
Customers’ Interests 

2.1.1
Firms exist in the first instance to pursue their commercial objectives. However, 
while pursuing them, financial firms are required to do so in a manner that places 
their customers’ (and potential customers’) interests at the heart of their 
culture, strategy, business model, decision-making and operations. This reflects 
the nature of financial services activities as complex, important and dependent 
on high levels of trust and confidence. The Code overall is designed to provide 
the legal framework for delivering on this obligation. 
2.1.2
As articulated in our  CPRA Guidance , firms need to consider the risks that the 
firm’s external operating environment, strategy, business model, internal 
processes and procedures, pose to their customers. 

Systemic Perspective 
2.1.3
As noted above, customers’ interests are best served through well-functioning 
financial services markets providing appropriate levels of availability and choice 
from sustainably profitable, resilient, well-run, customer focused firms who 
secure their customers’ interests. We recognise the important role we have in 
providing effective oversight to underpin the orderly and proper functioning of 
financial markets. Our regulatory approach seeks to support a resilient and 
trustworthy system that serves the interests and meets the needs of consumers 
and the economy. In meeting their obligations to their customers, firms need to 
take account of the overall market environment including the functioning of the 
system.  
Ownership 
2.1.4
The Code does not prescribe what can or should be done by firms in every 
particular scenario or set of individual circumstances. It articulates what is 
required of firms generally so that firms can determine for themselves, 
supported by this Guidance, what actions they should be taking to secure 
customers’ interests.   
2.1.5
Complying with the obligation to secure customers’ interests requires firms to 
take ownership  of how they meet this obligation. Adhering to the obligation will 
never be achieved by tick-box compliance with rules. It requires an approach 

[Page 10]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 10 

and mind-set which runs deeper and should operate at the centre of a firm’s 
culture, strategy, business model, decision-making and operations.  

Culture and Governance 
2.1.6
Strong governance and an appropriate customer-focused culture are 
fundamental to firms securing their customers’ interests. Customer-focused 
attitudes and behaviours should be promoted from the top down, and be visible 
throughout the firm.  
2.1.7
Those in leadership roles should ensure that the right standards are set and 
reflected throughout the business including strategy setting, product, service 
and delivery channel development, risk management, people management and 
complaints handling.  
2.1.8
The business as a whole has responsibility for securing customers’ interests. This 
is not a compliance obligation owned by risk or compliance staff, but the whole 
organisation.   
2.1.9
The importance of governance and controls in the effective management of 
consumer protection risks is reflected in the  CPRA Guidance which articulates 
the Central Bank’s expectation that firms should ensure that: 

• Reporting lines and management responsibilities and accountabilities for 
consumer protection risk are clear and transparent;  

• There is evidence of a clear understanding at board, board committees and 
management committees of key consumer protection risks;  

• There is evidence of a clear understanding of individuals’ responsibilities 
and skillset required to oversee and challenge the management of these 
risks;  

• The board can demonstrate that it has or can address consumer protection 
risks that have been escalated to it; and 

• The board tracks and monitors consumer protection risks. 
2.1.10 The focus on the responsibility and accountability of role holders and in 
particular firms’ senior management under the Individual Accountability 
Framework (IAF) also aligns with the Code’s focus on securing customers’ 
interests. The Common Conduct Standards and Additional Conduct Standards 10
require that individuals with responsibility for consumer related matters within 
firms, are bound to meet certain standards of behaviour in the exercise of their 

10 See Part 3A including Section 53E and Section 53F of the Central Bank Reform Act 2010.

[Page 11]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 11 

roles- management and staff that are more senior have additional obligations in 
this regard. Depending on the industry sector in which the individual is 
employed, s/he may also be subject to the Senior Executive Accountability 
Regime (SEAR). The application of individual conduct standards under the IAF 
aligns with the application of conduct-related Standards for Business in the 
Code, by ensuring that the behaviour and actions of the individuals working in 
firms contributes to firms’ adherence to their obligations under the Code.  
Strategy and Business Model 
2.1.11 Sustainable, resilient business models are central to a well-functioning market 
which can deliver availability, choice and value-for-money to consumers. Firms, 
in the first instance, exist to pursue commercial goals, but they also need to 
ensure that a customer-focused approach is reflected in the firm’s strategy and 
business model.  
2.1.12 This obligation does not conflict with a firm’s ability to seek to deliver a 
reasonable return for their shareholders based on a sustainable, resilient 
business model. Indeed, firms targeting a sustainable, reasonable return on 
capital over an appropriate time horizon, who place their customers’ (and 
potential customers’) interests at the heart of their strategy, business model, 
and decision-making are providing themselves with a sound basis for securing 
customers’ interests.  
2.1.13 Strategy and securing customers’ interests should not be considered in isolation 
from each other. Firms should not consider customer interests after a strategy 
has been set. Consideration of the impacts on customers and customer 
outcomes, needs to be a key aspect of the strategy formation process itself.  
2.1.14 Diversity of business models is to be expected and is both desirable and 
important. There are many different ways in which firms can meet the needs of 
consumers. Different customers want different types of products and services. 
They have different means and different needs. These will be met by, amongst 
other things, different levels of standardisation and/or automation on the one 
hand, and levels of individualisation, complexity and in-person engagement on 
the other.  
2.1.15 Firms should be clear and transparent on their offerings to their customers, 
allowing them to make informed decisions on whether it meets their needs and 
means, and aligns with their expectations.  

[Page 12]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 12 

Commercial Decision-Making 
2.1.16 Firms’ decision-making should take into account their customers’ interests. 
Firms should consider their actions and decisions in the context of their 
obligation to secure customers’ interests. This will include careful consideration 
of impacts on, and outcomes for customers including those who may be in 
vulnerable circumstances.  
2.1.17 Securing customers’ interests does not mean that a firm cannot make 
commercial decisions in the interests of shareholders. Commercial decision-
making reflects multiple factors including the need for firms to achieve 
reasonable, sustainable profitability and to build financial and operational 
resilience. While doing so, firms must also meet their obligation to secure their 
customers’ interests. Consideration of how this obligation can be met needs to 
be a factor in the commercial decision-making process. 
2.1.18 Firms that seek to unfairly exploit or take advantage of consumer behaviours, 
habits, preferences, or biases to benefit the firm in a way that causes customer 
detriment, represent a clear example of a failure to secure customers’ interests 
– in such circumstances we will intervene. Firms are not securing the interests of 
customers where a commercial decision is based on exploiting customer 
behaviours such as inertia, or unfairly exploiting or taking advantage of specific 
circumstances, such as a lack of available alternatives in the market, which 
results in customer detriment. 
2.1.19 As noted in the  CPRA Guidance,  we expect firms to ensure that: 

• All aspects of strategy formation and decision-making at board level 
demonstrate that the customer is central to the process and take full 
account of the implications of the firm’s strategy on consumer protection; 
and 

• Compliance and risk functions are involved by the firm and proactively 
consulted on consumer protection risks, with the ability to influence 
decisions. As a result, the firm should be able to provide examples of where 
compliance or risk functions have prevented the firm from taking action or 
substantially changed the action as a result of concerns about consumer 
impact. 11

11  As noted in the CPRA Guidance, firms should have risk management structures that are proportionate to the nature, 
scale and complexity of the firm. 

[Page 13]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 13 

Systems, controls, policies, processes and procedures that take account of 
customers’ interests 
2.1.20 The systems, controls, policies, processes and procedures put in place to execute 
and deliver a firm’s strategy and business models should be designed in a way 
that properly considers customers’ interests. Weak business processes can 
result in errors and/or customers failing to get an appropriate level of service. 
This includes when a customer has to wait too long for their query or complaint 
to be dealt with, or where the process they have to go through is unclear or 
unnecessarily difficult to navigate. Additionally, where firms do not have 
adequate processes and procedures to control and mitigate operational risks, 
this can have a severe impact on the quality and availability of the service 
provided to customers.  

2.1.21 Consideration needs to be given to how the design and implementation of 
systems, controls, policies, processes and procedures impacts on customer 
experience and outcomes.  
2.2
Securing Customers’ Interests During Business Model Change and 
Innovation 

2.2.1
Innovation provides opportunities for consumers through greater choice and 
ease of access to financial products and services. Through innovation, 
incumbents and new entrants develop new business models and business lines, 
new products and services, and new modes of delivery. 

2.2.2
However, innovation also brings potential challenges such as a lack of access to 
services for some consumers, the appropriate use of data including personal 
data, and the nature of the decision-making process for more financially 
significant and complex products. It is important that there is appropriate 
alignment between innovative developments and the interests of a firm’s 
customers, and these issues need to be properly considered and understood to 
ensure consumers are appropriately protected, while potential opportunities 
and benefits for consumers are maximised. 12

2.2.3
Firms should navigate innovation and change in a manner that incorporates 
securing customers’ interests into their commercial decision-making process 
and seeks to avoid creating risks to customers. The decision to materially change 
a firm’s product or service offering or their mode of delivery, should include a 
full consideration of the impact on and outcomes for customers. 

12 Digital for Good: Ireland’s Digital Inclusion Roadmap explores some of these issues. 

[Page 14]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 14 

Example 1: Securing Customers’ Interests in Digital Delivery 

Customers’ interests need to be considered and appropriately secured in 
the transition to digital delivery of products and services. 
There is a clear trend in financial services towards reduced physical presence and a 
reduction of in-person services with increasing delivery of products and services through 
digital channels. In moving to digital delivery, firms must secure their customers' 
interests. It is not sufficient to simply digitalise and rationalise activity in the absence of 
consideration of customer impacts. 

We expect firms’ digital platforms to be designed with their customers’ interests in mind. 
Firms are required to ensure that digital platforms are easy to navigate, to use and to 
understand, ensuring that consumers do not need specialist knowledge to access them. It 
is important in particular to ensure that certain cohorts of consumers, including those 
with poor digital literacy, do not become excluded through poor design.  

Firms should give consideration to the suitability of alternative modes of service 
provision for existing customers who may be excluded by digital delivery. This should 
include the development of solutions to ensure that customers, especially at-risk 
customers, can avail of services.  

A firm should only proceed with a decision to move to digital delivery, where it is satisfied 
that it has carefully considered customer impacts and identified appropriate mitigants to 
address identified issues for customers. This should include careful consideration of the 
impact on customers in vulnerable circumstances and what reasonable assistance might 
be provided to mitigate adverse impacts.  

Customers should also be provided with appropriate notice of changes to services, and 
impact assessments should be undertaken after transition to address any significant 
issues that may arise from a consumer perspective.  

This approach is reflected in requirements for retail banks relating to branch closure, or 
significant amendment of branch services, set out in the Banking, Credit and Arrears part 
of the Consumer Protection Regulations. Securing customers’ interests requires  all firms
to consider customer impacts when taking decisions to move to digital delivery. 

Commercial decisions should not be considered in isolation from a consideration of the 
impacts of that decision on customers. The decision to change a product, service or 
delivery channel should only be taken following full consideration of the risks and 
customer impacts that the changes pose. Firms need to be able to demonstrate how 
they are securing customers’ interests in undertaking such significant business model 
changes.

[IMAGE BLOCK]

Example 1: Securing Customers’ Interests in the Transition to 
Digital Delivery -  Customers’ interests need to be considered and 

appropriately secured in the transition to digital delivery. 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 2 images/figures]


[Page 15]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 15 

2.2.4
It is important that firms are able to innovate and become more cost efficient 
and effective. This commercial dynamic is key to ongoing improvement in 
availability and choice for consumers. Securing customers’ interests requires 
that these outcomes be pursued with full consideration of the effects on 
customers, and how customers’ interests can be secured.  
2.2.5
Firms should proactively assess the risks and the impact that changes to or new 
product and service offerings pose to customers, and should take steps to 
mitigate identified risks. Firms should have the customer service capacity and 
structures in place to meet reasonable service levels that provide a timely and 
customer-focused service through all channels.  
2.2.6
Customers should be adequately supported through changes. In particular, firms 
should consider the impact of their decisions on customers in vulnerable 
circumstances and provide necessary assistance. This should include specific 
and effective processes and communication to support such customers. 

2.3
Securing Customers’ Interests Through Product, Service and 
Delivery Channel Design 

2.3.1
The choices, actions and responses of a firm when designing and delivering its 
products and services are key to securing customers’ interests. Alignment of 
services and products with the needs, means and reasonable expectations of 
customers, is fundamental.  

2.3.2
When a firm is designing or reviewing a product, considering pricing or 
developing its communications and customer service approach, it should 
consider the needs of its customer base and target market. Firms should design 
and bring to market products with features that meet the needs of consumers 
identified for the product. 
Example 2: Securing Customers Interests’ under Digital Delivery 

Some firms only engage with their customers through digital channels. 
It is important that these firms give careful consideration to how they 
can secure their customers’ interests through this delivery channel. 

Carefully designed interfaces which are designed with the needs of the target market in 
mind are a key way that firms can secure their customers’ interests. Firms will often 
focus on ease of access, navigability and execution where they are seeking to encourage 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 16]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 16 

customers and potential customers to purchase their products and services.  It is clearly 
in the interests of firms to focus on good design where it supports growth of their 
customer base. 

Importantly, these principles should equally apply where firms are designing interfaces 
and systems to provide support for their customers. While customers may generally only 
need to engage with a firm through its standard digital interfaces to access services and 
execute transactions, there will be times where customers need access to additional 
support. For example if a system or interface is not working for a customer they will need 
to be able to engage with the firm to access support to resolve their issue. Similarly 
where a customer suspects that they have been the victim of fraud they will also need to 
be able to engage with the firm to access appropriate supports to deal with the situation. 

Supports and access channels should be designed in a way that seeks to effectively 
support the customer to get issues resolved quickly and to minimise negative impacts for 
customers.  

For example where a customer suspects that they have been the victim of fraud, having 
rapid access to appropriate supports can help customers to take steps to stop the harm 
and reduce negative impacts. Accessing and navigating supports should be simple and 
intuitive. Multiple types of supports can play a role, including providing access to 
standardised information, chatbots, helplines etc. The supports available should reflect 
the issue they are designed to address and the likely needs of customers impacted by 
that issue. 

Looking at the fraud example again, what does a customer who suspects they are the 
victim of fraud need? They need to be able to notify the firm quickly and have confidence 

that this will be acted on straightaway. This is vital to stopping harm and minimising 
impacts on the customer. Firms need to consider the circumstances of the customer and 
the impact this can have on the ability to navigate systems and processes. Reflecting this, 
systems to access supports need to be easy to find, access and use. Consideration should 
be given to whether in certain circumstances customers should have access to in-person 
support for significant issues. 

Supports for online or digital customers are an important aspect of meeting the 
obligation to secure customers’ interests. They should reflect the issue they are 
designed to address, and need to be easy to find, access and use. 

[Page 17]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 17 

Example 2: Use of Incentives in Product Design 

Incentives should be designed in a way that delivers positive outcomes 
for customers. They should not impair a customer’s ability to act in 
their own interests and to make informed choices in line with their 
financial needs.

Firms often include incentives in product offerings to create differentiation from 
competitors’ products and to make them more attractive for customers or potential 
customers based on customer preferences. While such features may represent legitimate 
commercial practices, the rationale for the inclusion of such features should be explored 
to determine if a firm is securing its customers’ interests.  
In assessing the appropriateness of including incentives in product design, firms need to 
ensure that the inclusion of incentives aligns with the interests of customers. Incentives 
should be designed in a way that supports customers to act in their own interests and 
make appropriately informed decisions in terms of product choices. Firms must not 
include features in products which unfairly exploit or take advantage of customer 
behaviours, habits, preferences or biases in order to benefit the firm in a way that will 
result in customer detriment. The obligation to not exploit customer behaviours, habits, 
preferences or biases is explored further in section 2.4 below.  
It is also important that customers understand the implications of choosing a product 
with an incentive instead of other alternatives available in the market that may 
potentially be more suitable for the customer over the long-term. Including features that 
increase the initial attractiveness of products, can interfere with price transparency and 
the ability of consumers to compare products effectively. 
Mortgage cashback provides one such example. Where it can be demonstrated that the 
cashback incentive can provide a positive outcome for the customer this may represent a 
legitimate commercial practice. However, if the provisions of such an incentive solely 
seeks to exploit customer inertia by incentivising a customer to choose a product which 
will be a more expensive product for them over the life of the product, this does not align 
with the obligation to secure customers’ interests. 
Firms should ensure that when offering incentives, they are designed in a way that 
seeks to deliver positive outcomes for customers by supporting customers to act in 
their own interests and to make informed choices in line with their financial needs.
Overall, firms should be able to demonstrate how the features of a product, including 
incentives, align with the interests of customers. 

Example 3: Use of Incentives in Product Design 

Incentives should be designed in a way that delivers positive outcomes  
for customers. They should not impair a customer’s ability to act in  
their own interests and to make informed choices in line with their  

financial needs. 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 18]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 18 

2.3.3
Many firms are subject to product oversight requirements that require 
manufacturers and distributors of financial products to ensure proper design 
and oversight of those products and services. These provide a framework for 
robust and responsible product design and distribution. They generally require 
that when products are being designed and brought to the market, the interests, 
objectives and characteristics of the target market are taken into account to 
avoid potential customer detriment. 13
2.3.4
This can be achieved through careful consideration of target markets, product 
testing, product monitoring and selection of appropriate distribution channels. 
Proper adherence to these requirements will support firms’ focus on the 
customer and meeting the obligation to secure customers’ interests. 
2.3.5
The importance of practices within the Product Life Cycle to the management of 
consumer risks is highlighted in the  CPRA Guidance  which articulates our 
supervisory expectations in relation to product development, the 
sales/transaction process and post sales handling, covering: 

• Product development : 

o Product development committees/forums consist of an appropriate 
balance of members, e.g. marketing/sales, compliance, risk and consumer 
advocacy representation, at a senior level to consider the consumer 
impact;  
o Products are withdrawn or not launched where concerns from a 
consumer perspective exist;  
o Consumer research is undertaken that seeks to get a better 
understanding of the target market in order to establish consumers’ 
potential needs and understanding of the product;  
o Oversight and monitoring of complaints, consumer feedback and relevant 
distribution channels, to assess ongoing ability of product design to meet 
consumer needs; and  
o Consumer protection risk is tracked and monitored. 

• Sales/transaction process : 

o Consumer outcomes are recorded and tracked;  
o Sales aids, training and procedural documentation support appropriate 
sales, and are designed to ensure that sales staff clearly explain the key 

13  For example, the European Banking Authority Guidelines on product governance and oversight arrangements for 
retail banking products link ; the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority - Approach to the 
supervision of product oversight and governance  link ;  and the European Securities and Markets Authority Guidelines 
on MiFID II product governance requirements link.

[Page 19]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 19 

features for each product or service offered to ensure that consumers are 
able to make informed decisions;  
o Sales areas (whether indirect or direct sales methods are used) are 
subject to regular quality assurance monitoring by external functions, e.g. 
internal audit and compliance;  
o Confirmation sought from consumers in relation to understanding 
eligibility and other key product information;  
o Documented process to escalate consumer detriment; and  
o Consumer protection risk is tracked and monitored. 

• Post sales handling:

o Clear policy and procedure in relation to post sales services and adequate 
training for staff providing such services, resulting in fair consumer 
outcomes;  
o Clear accountability for consumer outcomes with issues identified 
remediated;  
o Root cause analysis of complaints, appeals, issues or other matters 
escalated in relation to consumer protection risk and evidence that this 
analysis was used to mitigate future similar risks; and  
o Monitoring of post sales activities to identify any potential unsuitable or 
unfair consumer outcomes and potential consumer detriment that could 
occur if there are failings in the post sales process or the quality of service 
and/or advice, e.g. random sampling of call centre calls, ongoing reporting 
of key performance and key risk indicators. 

2.3.6
We expect firms to consider risks identified in relation to a product or service 
that is similar to other products the firm provides. Firms should use their 
understanding and experience of one product or service to secure the interests 
of customers accessing similar products or services.  

2.3.7
In 2019, the Central Bank put in place restrictions on the sale of contracts for 
difference 14  (CFDs) to retail investors to address significant concerns about the 
risk to retail investors from these products. Where there are other products 
with similar relevant features or aspects, securing their customers’ interests 
requires firms to implement similar controls and restrictions in relation to those 
other products. Firms should never wait for the Central Bank to intervene 
before they take the necessary steps to effectively secure their own customers’ 
interests. 

14 https://www.centralbank.ie - central-bank-cfd-intervention-measure.pdf .

[Page 20]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 20 

Asymmetries of resource, information and expertise 
2.3.8
The asymmetry or imbalance in information, expertise and time between 
financial services firms and customers can increase the risk that customers may 
experience poor outcomes where firms are not securing their customers’ 
interests. In designing products, services and delivery channels, firms should not 
be seeking to take advantage of these asymmetries.  

Firms can only design and bring to market products with features, charges and risks that 
meet the needs of customers identified for the product, i.e. products must be suitable for 
the customers they are targeted at. 
Product complexity can impact the ability of customers to understand risks associated 
with products and to compare products effectively. Firms need to consider difficulties 
customers may have in understanding the features of products.  
Given this, for more complex products or services, firms should consider their potential 
target market in particular detail. They need to take account of any increased risk of 
consumer harm associated with customers accessing inappropriate products or services, 
due to a lack of customer understanding of the risks involved.   
For example, investment products with complicated features may make it difficult for 
retail investors to fully understand the potential risks associated with the product and 
the probability of those risks arising. Such products may only be appropriate for a 
narrower target market and a particular distribution strategy or channel. Some products 
may not be appropriate for execution only models and should only be sold with advice 
where it is possible for the firm to determine the suitability of the product for the 
customer and the level of customer understanding. Firms should carefully consider how 
specific products are targeted and whether they should only be or typically be sold with 
advice. 
In meeting their obligation to secure their customers’ interests, firms need to be able to 
demonstrate that they can effectively bridge the gap between the knowledge and 
expertise of their target market, and the complexity and sophistication of a product.  

Example 4: Appropriate Target Markets and Delivery 
Channels 

In designing and developing products, services and delivery channels, 
firms need to consider what the appropriate target market is. 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 21]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 21 

2.3.9
Firms need to consider the knowledge and expertise of their customers, the 
complexity and sophistication of the proposed product or service, and 
determine if and how they can effectively reduce the gap between the two 
through the design and delivery of products and services. 
2.3.10 Products should be designed with real customer needs in mind. They should be 
targeted only at customers with those needs, with risks properly explained. 
Alignment with customers’ needs and risk appetite is critical.  
2.3.11 To do this effectively, firms should identify their customer base for a particular 
product or service. They should consider the characteristics, risk profile, 
complexity and nature of the product or service, to determine if it meets the 
needs and risk appetite of the potential target market. 

Example 4: Marketing and Sale of ‘Green’/‘Sustainable’ 
Products 

Customers should have confidence that ‘green’ or ‘sustainable’ 
financial products are accurately and fairly represented. Firms need to 
engage with climate-related activities as responsible agents in the transition to a 
climate neutral economy.
Consumers of financial services increasingly want access to ’green’ or ‘sustainable’ 
financial products to support climate transition. There has been a substantial increase in 
the development of financial products described as being ‘green’ or ‘sustainable’. It is 
important for industry to ensure that sustainable financial products are described in an 
accurate and transparent manner and that customers can trust the information they 
receive regarding the green credentials of firms and products. 
The provision of information on ‘sustainable’ or ‘green’ financial products must be rooted 
in both the obligation on firms to inform effectively and to secure customers’ interests. 
The provision of ‘sustainable’ or ‘green’ products should not be viewed as an opportunity 
to increase information asymmetries between firms and customers and leverage these 
asymmetries to mislead or misdirect customers. This extends to the provision of 
information on specific products and services and on a firm’s green credentials. 
The specific features and characteristics of ‘sustainable’ or ‘green’ products should be 
clearly explained in plain and simple terms that a customer can be expected to 
understand.  

Example 5: Marketing and Sale of ‘Green’/‘Sustainable’  
Products 

Customers should have confidence that ‘green’ or ‘sustainable’  
financial products are accurately and fairly represented.  
Firms need to engage with climate-related activities as responsible  
agents in the transition to a climate neutral economy.

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 22]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 22 

2.3.12 Mode of delivery and execution is also an important consideration. For some 
products, risks can arise from the speed and ease at which contracts can be 
completed through digital execution-only delivery channels. The absence of 
human interaction and/or advice to support customer decision-making may not 
be appropriate for certain products and services, and firms should give 
consideration to the appropriateness of delivery channels as part of the product 
design process.  
2.3.13 Additionally, while many customers may be generally happy to receive a 
financial service digitally they may still require an in-person engagement to deal 
with a specific problem, query or failure on the part of the financial service 
provider. 
2.4
Customer Behaviours, Habits, Preferences and Biases  

2.4.1
While consumer behaviour, habits and preferences can be integrated into a 
firm’s approach, this should only be done in a way that is designed to enhance 
customer outcomes and does not cause customer detriment. Firms should 
respond appropriately to customers’ patterns of behaviour. 
2.4.2
Firms can pursue commercial goals, but they cannot seek to generate 
inappropriate gains or advantages by leveraging consumer susceptibilities 
created through consumer behaviours and habits such as inertia or ‘stickiness’ 
which result in customer detriment. As we have seen with differential pricing, 
when developing their pricing policies and practices, firms should always 
challenge themselves to be sure that they are not, consciously or unconsciously, 
unfairly exploiting or taking advantage of customers’ inertia to their detriment. 
2.4.3
Digitalisation is expanding the availability of financial data facilitating customer 
profiling and increasing the risk that firms can seek to inappropriately exploit 
consumer behaviours, habits, preferences or biases. However, this can also 
occur under traditional business models as seen in the Irish home and motor 
insurance markets in the case of differential pricing (see Case Study 1). 

Case Study 1: Differential Pricing in Insurance

Pricing practices should not result in unfair outcomes for 
customers. Firms cannot engage in unfair, hidden or 
discriminatory practices that seek to exploit customer behaviours, habits, 
preferences or biases and result in customer detriment. 

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 23]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 23 

Data and Artificial Intelligence 

15 https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-market-sectors/insurance-reinsurance/home-and-motor-insurance-

rules.
16  S.I. No. 126/2022 - Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 (Section 48(1)) (Insurance Requirements) 
Regulations 2022 is consolidated into the Consumer Protection Regulations.

The practice of ‘price walking’, which was prevalent in the home and motor insurance 
market prior to the introduction of rules and guidance by the Central Bank to ban the 
practice, provides a clear example of firms seeking to take advantage of, or exploit, 
customer behaviour or habits to the benefit of the firm and at the cost of customers. 
Price walking occurs where customers are charged higher premiums the longer they 
remain with the same insurance provider, for no reason other than staying with their 
provider.  
The Central Bank undertook a comprehensive review in 2021 to assess the extent to 
which differential pricing was being used by insurers in the motor and home insurance 
markets in Ireland, and its impact on policy holders. The principal conclusion from the 
differential pricing review was that ‘price walking’ could result in unfair outcomes for 
some customers in motor and home insurance. This is particularly the case where it is 
used to increase the prices for policyholders by stealth, or if it affects vulnerable groups 
or those with differing abilities, time or willingness to search for better offers available.  

The Central Bank published the  Final Report and Public Consultation 15  on the Review of 
Differential Pricing in the Private Motor and Home Insurance Markets in July 2021, 
which included proposals for new Central Bank regulations to address the findings.  
Following a consultation process on these proposals, new insurance regulations were 
introduced in July 2022 to ban price walking from the date of subsequent renewal. The 
Regulations 16  prohibit insurance providers from setting a subsequent renewal price for 
private car or home insurance that is higher than the equivalent year one renewal price. 
In applying the 2022 regulations, firms should ensure that the inertia associated with 
longer tenure customers is not exploited to apply pricing which does not align with the 
underlying insurance risk associated with those customers.   

Exploiting customer inertia to apply differential pricing is an example of the types of 
scenario where firms should ask themselves what are the assumptions and drivers 
underlying their approach and challenge themselves on whether their approach is aligned 
with their responsibility to secure the interests of customers (and potential customers). 
For example, while a difference between technical pricing and actual pricing increasing 
with length of tenures can be consistent with risk-related factors, firms should be sure 
that it does not reflect reliance on inertia or ‘loyalty’ of longer-standing customers. 

[Page 24]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 24 

2.4.4
Firms have increasing access to detailed information about the lives and 
lifestyles of customers who, often unwittingly, provide information about 
themselves to internet service providers, which can be sold to other firms 
including financial services firms.  

2.4.5
The use of data and Artificial Intelligence (AI) presents risks to consumers in 
terms of information asymmetries. From a customer perspective, these 
asymmetries, facilitated by algorithmic profiling which is invisible to customers, 
have the potential to create an inequality where a firm has much greater 
knowledge about the customer, affecting how the firm markets products, prices 
products and ultimately sells products to customers. Used inappropriately, it can 
enable unfair profiling and facilitate the exploitation of customers, including 
those who are less familiar with technology. 

2.4.6
Firms should not use data and profiling to identify behaviours, habits, 
preferences or biases for the purposes of exploiting these to target customers 
with products with unfair features that are not suitable for customers and result 
in customer detriment.  

Dark Patterns 
2.4.7
Dark patterns, found in online user interfaces, are design features that may 
steer, deceive, coerce or manipulate consumers into making choices that often 
are not in their best interests. 17

2.4.8
The European Union Digital Services Act 18  describes dark patterns on online 
platforms as practices that materially distort or impair, either on purpose or in 
effect, the ability of recipients of the service to make autonomous and informed 
choices or decisions. Such practices can be used to persuade the recipients of 
the service into undesired decisions, or to engage in unwanted behaviours, 
which have negative consequences for them. 19  This is not in line with the Code 
obligation to secure customers’ interests. 

2.4.9
The use of technology to deliver products and services to customers should 
serve their interests and not be viewed as an opportunity to exploit their 
behaviours, biases or vulnerabilities, or to increase asymmetries and imbalances 
between customers and firms.  
Choice Architecture 

17  See, for example, OECD Digital Economy paper - Dark Commercial Patters ( link ); also “Dark Patterns, Enforcement, 

and the emerging Digital Design Acquis -- Manipulation beneath the Interface” by Leiser and Santos ( link ) . 
18 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-services-act-package .
19 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32022R2065.

[Page 25]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 25 

2.4.10 A well-designed digital interface, focused on securing customers’ interests, can 
enhance the customer experience and customer outcomes.  
2.4.11 However, choice architecture can influence the choices and decisions customers 
make. Digital interfaces should not be designed to distort or impair the decision-
making process. It is not acceptable for firms to design their choice architecture 
to covertly manipulate or coerce customers into choices that benefit the firm 
but are not in customers’ interests, for example, by misdirecting a customer to a 
product or service that is more expensive than valid alternatives or that is ill- 
suited to the customers’ needs and/or risk appetite. 

2.5
Dealing with Errors or Mistakes and Customer Complaints  

2.5.1
Where individual customers have issues with financial products or services their 
first line of protection is the firm itself. Under the Code, firms are required to 
resolve errors and complaints efficiently and in a timely manner. 
2.5.2
Effective engagement with customers is key to resolving complaints and errors 
or mistakes. Firms should consider the most effective approach to complaints 
resolution taking account of the circumstances of the case. In many cases, 
mediation may be an effective tool to reach a mutually acceptable resolution of 
an issue. 
2.5.3
As articulated in the  CPRA Guidance  firms should ensure there is clear 
accountability for remediation of issues identified. There should be root cause 
analysis of complaints, appeals issues or other matters escalated in relation to 
consumer protection risks and evidence that this analysis was used to mitigate 
similar risks in the future. Firms should reflect on whether they have stopped 
the harm by taking ownership of the issue, fixing it, learning from it and ensuring 
it does not reoccur. 
2.5.4
The  CPRA Guidance also notes that there should be monitoring of post sales 
activities by firms to identify any potential unsuitable or unfair consumer 
outcomes and potential consumer detriment that could occur if there are 
failings in the post sales process, or in the quality of service and/or advice, e.g. 
random sampling of call centre calls and ongoing reporting of key performance 
and key risk indicators.  
2.5.5
Firms also have an obligation under the Code to ensure that errors or issues 
identified for one customer which may reasonably have affected other 

[Page 26]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 26 

customers are resolved for all affected customers efficiently, fairly and in a 
timely manner.  

2.5.6
When firms identify individual customer issues, they should proactively seek to 
identify all affected customers by undertaking an impact assessment on a timely 
and comprehensive basis. They should then undertake follow-up actions to 
appropriately remediate the position for all affected customers, without having 
to wait for a complaint or other prompt from other impacted customers.  
2.5.7
In cases where issues are to be resolved on the initiative of the firm, remediation 
should be accompanied by full disclosure to provide transparency and 
accountability on the remediation plan and process.  

2.6
Securing the Interests of All Customers 

2.6.1
Financial services firms’ business models often involve the legitimate 
segmentation of customers. However securing the interests of customers 
cannot justify the unfair exploitation of a cohort of customers given their 
individual characteristics, resulting in their detriment. The interests of all 
customers must be secured. Where firms unfairly exploit one cohort of 
customers, they cannot argue that securing the interests of another cohort of 
customers justifies their actions.  

2.7
Unregulated Activities of Regulated Firms 

2.7.1
It is a concern that consumers are not always aware when financial products or 
services, which are provided to them by regulated firms, are not regulated.  
2.7.2
If a customer transacts in unregulated products or services with an established 
regulated business, or an unregulated subsidiary or group entity of that regulated 
business, the reputation of the regulated firm can serve to provide potentially 
misguided reassurance to a customer in relation to unregulated activities.  
2.7.3
Where regulated firms undertake both regulated and unregulated activities, 
there is a heightened risk that consumers may misunderstand the protections 
they are afforded when accessing unregulated products and/or services by 
virtue of the regulated status of the firm.  

[Page 27]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 27 

Regulated firms often use branding and other marketing tools to distinguish themselves 
from other firms operating in the market. A firm will utilise branding to identify its 
products and services as having come from that firm. 

Where a customer engages with a regulated firm to transact business activities that are 
not regulated, the firm’s reputation and its regulatory status (i.e. the ‘Halo Effect’), may 
serve to provide unjustified reassurance to customers. For example, this may lead 
customers to believe that the sale of the unregulated products or services are subject to 
the same binding regulatory requirements as apply to the sale of regulated products, 
when they are not. Moreover, customers may assume that they have access to 
protections such as deposit protection or investor compensation schemes, when they do 
not. This is an area with the potential risk for very significant detriment to consumers. 

Confusion can arise where regulated firms, or their unregulated subsidiaries, carry out 
unregulated activities while using identical or similar branding to the branding used for 
the regulated activities also provided by the regulated firm.  

Regulated firms have a positive obligation under the Code to take appropriate steps to 
mitigate the risk that a customer will understand an activity to be, or to carry the 

protections of, a regulated activity where this is not the case. This requires firms to 
ensure that the use of branding does not contribute to confusion or misunderstanding on 
the regulatory status of a product or service. The closer in nature an unregulated product 
or service is, or appears to be, to a regulated financial service or product, the greater the 
risk of such misunderstanding or misperception. 

Firms need to carefully consider the use of branding on their websites and apps where 
these channels are used to display information and or facilitate execution of transactions 
in products or services that are not regulated. 20  It should be clear to customers when they 
are moving outside the regulatory space. This can be supported through disclosures and
warnings but firms also need to consider if the use of branding can contribute to 
confusion .

20 Regulation 72 of the Consumer Protection Regulations requires firms to provide information on its website in 
relation to regulated activities on a separate webpage from any webpage on its website providing information on 
unregulated activities.

[IMAGE BLOCK]

Example 6: Appropriate Use of Firm Branding 

In utilising branding, firms need to carefully consider the potential 
impacts and outcomes for customers. It is not appropriate for firms to 
use branding in a way that can confuse or mislead customers or 
potential customers on the regulatory status of products or services. 
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 28]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 28 

2.7.4
It is therefore important for firms to ensure that customers understand the 
regulatory status of the products and services they are provided with. There 
should be no risk that a customer will have a sense that they are in ‘regulated 
territory’ when they purchase unregulated products or services from a 
regulated provider. Under the Code’s Standards for Business, firms are required 
to ensure that all information they provide to customers is presented in a way 
that seeks to effectively inform the customer. Under the Securing Customers’ 
Interests Supporting Standards for Business, firms are required to take 
appropriate steps to mitigate the risk that a customer will understand an activity 
to be, or to carry the protections of, a regulated activity where this is not the 
case. Firms’ use of branding should not contribute to confusion on the 
regulatory status of products and services. The creation by a financial services 
group of a separate subsidiary for the purpose of undertaking unregulated 
activities, using the same branding it uses for its regulated activities, where 
those unregulated activities have significant potential to cause confusion for 
consumers and carry high risk of potential harm would not reflect a culture or 
mind-set that seeks to secure the interests of those consumers. 

2.7.5
Acting to secure customers’ interests applies to a firm in the overall conduct of 
its affairs. Firms should view good culture and a commitment to securing 
customers’ interests as being central to its relationship with its customers, 
irrespective of the regulatory status of the product or service in question. Good 
culture and a commitment to securing customers’ interests does not turn on or 
off depending on the legal or regulatory status of the business that a regulated 
firm does.  

2.8
Importance of Contractual Clarity 

2.8.1
There should be high-quality communication and transparency in the terms on 
which firms do business. Ambiguities call into question whether firms are 
providing an appropriate level of transparency and are adhering to their 
obligation under the Standards for Business to inform customers effectively.   
2.8.2
A firm is required to ensure that all information it provides to customers is 
presented in a way that seeks to effectively inform the customer – this includes 
bringing key information to the customer’s attention, and ensuring that all 
information that it provides to a customer is clear, accurate, up to date and 
written in plain and accessible language. This obligation extends to all aspects of 
the relationship with the customer, including how the firm ensures that the 
customer is clear on the contracts that they may enter into with the firm.  

[Page 29]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 29 

Case Study 2: Business Interruption Insurance 

The Central Bank expects firms to adopt a customer-first  
approach to the resolution of contractual ambiguities. Where 
ambiguities arise, the interpretation most favourable to the 
policyholder should prevail. 
At the outset of the Covid-19 pandemic the Central Bank immediately identified business 
interruption as a significant issue that would impact businesses across Ireland. The issue 
of whether or not Business Interruption (BI) insurance policies provided cover for the 
losses arising from the Government’s imposed closures became a central issue both in 
Ireland and internationally. We moved swiftly to identify potentially systemic issues of 
customer harm relating to BI insurance and prioritised this issue though a system-wide 
supervisory examination underpinned by the COVID-19 and Business Interruption 
Insurance Supervisory Framework (Supervisory Framework). 21
We were clear in our expectations and requirements of regulated firms, by requiring that 
all valid claims be paid promptly and where there was a doubt about the meaning of a 
term in a firm’s BI insurance policy wordings, the interpretation most favourable to the 
policyholder should prevail.  
The Central Bank’s system-wide examination was based on identifying all groups of 
impacted policies where, in our view, the relevant contractual provisions provided cover 
for COVID-19 related interruption and/or interference to businesses. The Central Bank 
was clear with all relevant firms about its expectations and its view in relation to ‘cover’ 
and ‘causation’ following our review of relevant policy wordings.  
Some firms accepted valid claims early in the process while other firms decided to seek 
legal confirmation and clarification, based on the outcome of relevant test cases, before 
making a final determination on ‘cover’ and ‘causation’. However, following the decision 
of the High Court in February 2021 22 , all relevant firms accepted that cover existed for 
similarly affected policies and those firms then contacted policyholders with valid claims 
in order to progress those claims.  
The Central Bank also reinforced its expectations to relevant firms in respect of policy 
wordings that were determined to be responsive to the outbreak of COVID-19 in Ireland. 

21 https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/consumer-hub-library/covid-19/covid-19---business-interruption-
insurance---supervisory-framework.pdf.
22 https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/8bfaa5dd-3ea3-4580-979f-0dfb2d8243be/2021_IEHC_78.pdf/pdf#view=fitH.

[IMAGE BLOCK]
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 30]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 30 

This included an expectation that firms identify and contact potentially affected 
policyholders, assist policyholders in making a claim, were operationally ready to deal 
with claims and had adequate governance and oversight of the process. All relevant firms 
made progress in line with the Central Bank’s expectations, with relevant policyholders 
notified and settlements progressed where all required information had been provided 
by the policyholders. 

2.8.3
If a firm complies with its obligation to be effective in its communications with 
its customers, this should significantly mitigate the risks arising from contractual 
ambiguity.  
2.8.4
Firms must also be cognisant of the requirements in respect of consumer 
contracts in the Consumer Rights Act 2022. 23
2.8.5
Where material ambiguity arises, the Central Bank expects firms to apply the 
understanding that most benefits the customer. Firms should seek to resolve 
any contractual interpretation issues as quickly as possible. Firms should 
consider all alternatives before engaging in litigation to resolve contractual 
ambiguity. 
2.9
Delivering Fair Outcomes for Customers 

2.9.1
The way in which a business measures its success should include consideration 
of outcomes for its customers. Securing customers’ interests requires a focus, 
not only on the actions taken at a point in time, but also more importantly on the 
ultimate outcome for the customer. 
2.9.2
While we acknowledge the role both firms and customers play in influencing 
outcomes, firms should strive for positive customer outcomes. This requires 
them to identify, as appropriate, the risks to customers that might prevent 
positive outcomes. Firms effectively securing customers’ interests will: 

• Develop products and services that are fit for purpose and meet the needs 
and expectations of customers; 

• Ensure delivery channels are effective for the products and services offered 
and the relevant customer base;  

• Provide consumers identified as in vulnerable circumstances with the support 
they need when engaging with financial services; and 

23 https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/37/enacted/en/html.

[Page 31]
Guidance on Securing Customers’ Interests 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Page 31 

• Ensure their communication and engagement with customers empowers them 
to make decisions in their own interests. 
2.9.3 Delivery of these important fundamentals, which are reflected in the broader 
requirements of the Code, will underpin positive customer outcomes, ensuring that 
firms secure customers’ interests.  

How information is presented impacts on the effectiveness of the communication for 
customers. Poor information presentation can impede consumers’ ability to assess the 
benefits and risks of a financial product. This is more likely when the product is complex 
or when there are many similar types of product on the market. This can result in 
consumers purchasing unsuitable products. 
Consumer behavioural research undertaken by the Central Bank 24  on the application of 
requirements for lenders to provide customers with information on alternative mortgage 
options that are available from their provider, highlighted how small but targeted 
changes made to lender notifications can significantly increase customer engagement 
with the options presented to them. This is a clear example of how firms can implement 
requirements, not simply to comply with the rules, but to optimally secure customers’ 
interests by focusing on outcomes. 
Firms should consider their overall approach to communicating customer information, to 
make sure the information supports customers to make effective, timely and informed 
decisions. In doing so, a firm’s overall approach should be less about simply ‘providing 
information’ to meet their regulatory disclosure obligation and more about ‘seeking to 
support practical understanding’ by the customer – so that the customer is enabled to 
take action to enhance their own financial well-being. 
While the research findings noted relate to one specific notification requirement – 
relating to mortgage holders - the findings have direct relevance for all firms as they 
consider how to most effectively secure customers’ interests. Providing information in 
a way that supports real understanding and supports practical, situation-improving 
action by customers is key to securing customers’ interests. Firms will be truly securing 
the interests of customers when the same level of consideration is given to the impact 
of regulatory and risk disclosures, as is given to the impact of marketing disclosures. 

24 https://www.centralbank.ie/news-media/press-releases/targeted-communications-with-mortgage-borrowers-can-

help-to-improve-uptake-of-refinancing-opportunities-8-december-2022.

[IMAGE BLOCK]

Example 7: Focusing on delivering positive outcomes for customers 

In implementing the Code’s requirements, the focus of firms should not  
simply be on complying with the rules, but on how to apply them in a  
way that optimally secures customers’ interests by focusing on  
customer outcomes. 
[Contains 1 images/figures]


[Page 32]
T : +353 (0)1 224 5800     
E : publications@centralbank.ie 
www.centralbank.ie 
[Contains 1 images/figures]
